Portuguese are horrible people
Blog AuthorBlog Author21 November, 2022Moving and Living in Portugal443 Comments
Portuguese mentality
This article is not about the (genuinely) decent and upstanding Portuguese, albeit not more than 5%, as I perceive it and according to my anecdotal experience, but about the remaining 95% made up of crooks, idiots as as well as the conniving/passive/simpletons who constantly look the other way (which makes them equally guilty/responsible for the perpetual tragic situation) who, for a variety of reasons, turn life in Portugal a hell and a very dangerous and unhappy place to live in, with the real potential to destroy your life due to all the unbridled madness, lawlessness and the covert dictatorship.

Extremely dangerous! In Portugal you play Russian roulette with your life (well-being) every day, without knowing it! Don’t believe any of the Portuguese propaganda and brainwashing, often in collusion with the Portuguese media! Both for external and internal consumption. They are compulsive liars and hide everything from the population!

Don’t believe the “international awards” either, most of them are bought.

Unfortunately, the international organizations are also being completely fooled by Portugal, and they just parrot what Portugal wants them to say. Especially with regard to the true level of corruption, which is practically total in the highest and most important bodies, and the rule of law, which doesn’t exist, period. Don’t believe them either! The main factor contributing to this deception is the conniving, cowardly and totally passive behavior of the Portuguese people, who confuse the outside world.

Portugal is a country full of deadly mines where you least expect them and where almost nothing is what it seems.

To run risks in Portugal, all you have to do is live a normal life.

This article is about the experience of living in Portugal for several years, integrated and living in the country as if you were any other native citizen who needs the system and its people to make a living.
If you visit Portugal simply as a tourist, you will most likely have a very pleasant experience in contact with the Portuguese, who are generally very friendly people, but unfortunately most of the time this is nothing more than a mask that hides a very dark Portugal.

Portugal is what it is because the Portuguese are what they are.

Behind the facade of apparent normality, you will find out the worst way how horrible the Portuguese are if you live there long enough, bearing no resemblance to any other place in the world. Honestly, Portugal is a country of crooks and undiagnosed mentally deficient people. Indeed, as one might expect, at the institutional and governmental level, it is an institutionally retarded country, one could even say that Portugal is a country built by retards. My nine years’ experience as an expat/immigrant in Portugal has shown me how devious things can get. Deep down, the Portuguese are only happy when they see others suffering, and that doesn’t spare their own family members. They rejoice in the misfortune of others and even make jokes about it, this includes the detestable people of the law in Portugal, as happened to me.

When a Portuguese sees someone, no matter who, who has managed, for example, to buy a nice car, a nice house, whatever… The Portuguese won’t think something positive like: “Good for him, if he can do it, so can I, as long as I work harder and smarter.” The wicked Portuguese will turn green with envy and will do everything to machinate that person (behind your back, of course, as the Portuguese are the most cowardly people I’ve ever seen, after all, all crooks are cowards) and it’s completely irrelevant whether it’s a relative or not, he/she will certainly dream every night that you have a very nasty accident with that beautiful new car that makes you so happy. Awful but true!

The Portuguese are, above all, excruciatingly envious of happy people. They can’t stand to see anyone happy.

Portuguese really hate happy, successful people, because deep down they’re a bunch of losers.

One of the Portuguese’s favorite “sports” is to cowardly puncture the tires of their neighbor’s car, putting nails, screws, whatever behind the tires when no one is looking. It happened to me, but unfortunately I only realized that something very suspicious was going on when I was punctured for the third time in the same month. As if that wasn’t enough, this bastard also loved to throw cigarette butts (out of his window) at the top of my car, in a clear attempt to burn the paintwork, as there were always lots of cigarette butts very close to my car.

Cigarette butts thrown on Portuguese streets
Cigarette butts littering the streets. Portuguese streets, roadsides and what not, are always full of garbage! | The Real Portugal
Life in Portugal feels like living in a sewer, mainly because of the sh*tty people who surround you and make your life a living hell when we need them most.
The best you can expect from Portuguese society and its people is absolute mediocrity (and patheticness). Portugal’s middle name should be mediocrity, and that’s already a compliment.

A Portuguese lawyer told me, in the most blasé way possible, that it’s normal to happen if the Portuguese judge suspects or knows that you have a nice car, a nice house, or whatever it is that he/she envies you, (not exactly those words, but the same meaning, referring to my particular case). So, because he/she has this grudge against you, this judge will destroy your in a heartbeat with a signature and a big smile on his/her face. It is extremely disturbing that, for these people, this is perfectly normal and acceptable, because they don’t even realize that there is something terribly disturbing and criminal about this behavior. These “judges” are committing a heinous crime by acquitting and protecting criminals based of their personal prejudices. This is not normal! Precisely when society counts on and most needs a judge as a last and proper resort to live up to its highest moral standards and do its fundamental job of applying the law and protecting the innocent.
When you talk to a Portuguese person until you are blue in the face about these monstrous scandals that happen every day in the Portuguese justice system or about the corrupt and dirty Portuguese politicians who steal billions of euros from the pockets of the Portuguese taxpayers and the European Union, the Portuguese just tighten their lips and look at you with a zombie face without any reaction, as if you were crazy for talking about it and stating the glaring (very dangerous) truth, or they laugh like freaks and find the seriousness of what you’re talking about very funny.

An episode in which you can see how the Portuguese are so permissive with corruption and conniving with the corrupt (even to their own detriment): I once spoke with a Portuguese man about the corruption of many billions of euros that has happened and continues to happen in the construction of highways (and other projects) just for the purpose of lining the pockets of a few with absurd amounts of money, (financed almost entirely or at least very substantially by European funds, but even if it were only with Portuguese taxpayers’ money, the gravity would be the same). We’re talking about ghost highways with no traffic that are of no use to the country, as well as other schemes. This Portuguese answered me extremely naturally, as if he were saying the smartest thing in the world: that it’s good to build/have highways for foreigners to see. (!?!)
Related news can be found here and here, about ruinous contracts/thieving and the like for the passive Portuguese.

In this respect, it is impossible to talk about serious or extremely grave matters with the Portuguese, most of the time they find everything that’s not for laughs very funny, or they also say something extremely stupid and nonsensical about it, and often revolting.

In Portugal, the abnormality is the normality, when it’s not a downright aberration.

In Portugal, almost everything is so unnecessarily and even sadistically complicated (mad), often with serious detrimental effects on your life.

In Portugal there is absolutely no respect for other people’s time. Particularly at the institutional level, they waste years of your life, often more than a decade, as if they were just days, especially when things are serious or critical, and to make matters worse, most of the time, in the end, they don’t solve anything.

Portuguese Christmas market
Typical Portuguese Christmas Market. Not pretty and rather pauper. Can you feel the joy in the air? | The Real Portugal
The Portuguese justice system is a monstrous fraud, which includes Portuguese lawyers, all of whom are chasing the most profitable Portuguese business ever, the victim business! The business of exploiting and robbing the victims of their very last cent and drop of blood until there is nothing more left to take from them. In true democracies victims are protected and heard, but in Portugal they are just a commodity and a tremendously profitable one.

There is nothing more dangerous and nefarious than a Portuguese with power. Whatever position they hold, it will never be good for the people under them, generally speaking.

The Portuguese love to have the power to make other people’s lives miserable.

Portugal is, in practical terms, a dictatorship of crooks (and idiots and mediocrities), admired by a population that is broadly the same and shares the same objectives, truly it is all a BIG SCAM, but they call themselves a democracy just to primarily continue to cheat the EU, so the EU keeps sending billions of Euros in handouts to the corrupt Portuguese to feed their luxurious lives with the hard earned money of the European taxpayers. Mine and yours, if you’re an EU citizen.

In my nine wasted years in this horrible place called Poortugal, I only met acquaintances, I never found anyone I could call a friend or who treated me (sincerely) as a friend. The Portuguese are not people who can be trusted, not even with banalities, because the more information they have about you, the more dangerous your life becomes, not necessarily physically, but in everything else, due to the Portuguese being very envious people (I’ve never seen a country with such envious people as Portugal) and have many inferiority complexes. Even among them, there are no real friends, only self-interest (they are always backstabbing each other, including within their own families). Portuguese are generally very mean and toxic people to hang out with.
Without a doubt, most of the time there is a very negative and depressing aura of energy around the Portuguese when you get to know them better. It’s weird.

Portugal has the typical misery of dictatorships, a mixture of economic misery and a deep, lingering sadness.

For most Portuguese, when they see an honest person, they think they’re stupid and won’t hesitate to take advantage of you.

When you need Portuguese people for something, you usually get screwed. Unfortunately, most foreigners find this out sooner or later.

Vandalized Chinese store in Portugal
Even Chinese stores are not doing well in Portugal. | The Real Portugal
Actually, almost everywhere you look in Portugal is tremendously depressing and ugly; the dirty streets, the neglected buildings, the pauper shop windows, the cars falling apart… It’s really bad… (Except for the most touristic areas, and even then… and nature, of course.) However, I must say that compared to other European countries, Portugal has very few historical sites worth visiting, besides most of the monuments and historical sites are dirty, very poorly preserved and managed.

For the Portuguese, lying is as natural as breathing, it’s institutionalized. I was astonished when I witnessed that lying has no weight whatsoever, even in court, absolutely zero, and even less when it’s the criminal or the prosecutor who lies.

In Portugal, the lie is the truth and the truth is the lie, the more serious the matter, the worse it is.

I am very convinced that almost all Portuguese don’t distinguish between right and wrong, there is no such thing as scruples, very seriously, they don’t really know the true meaning of the words: honesty, honor, ethics, morals, decency, truth, justice, friendship, reliability, loyalty, integrity, democracy, freedom of expression, rights and duties, citizenship, civility, community, shame… Very sadly, most Portuguese only know and take care of what is good for themselves. They have no moral values and are incapable of any kind of (not fake) empathy towards others. For many, their only value is; what’s yours is mine (whenever they get the chance). The Portuguese have all their values reversed.

The Portuguese would rather hear lies than know the truth.

Portugal is such a bad place and devoid of any trace of real humanity (i.e. empathy, justice, solidarity, rationality…) that even if you have money, you can never get any real help. In fact, if you have money, it’s even worse for you, because you keep suffering more and more from the problems and the monsters you meet along the way, including lawyers and the justice system, who are only interested in taking any money you “still” have, for nothing, until you are literally bankrupt, if you don’t get out in time.

Basically, in Portugal, if you have money, you walk around with a bull’s-eye on your back (and it’s even worse for foreigners because we are more vulnerable).

One thing that characterizes Portugal very well is that it is a society made up of endless thieves like no other in the world. They act with total impunity, fiercely protected by the forces of “law”, and they are even officially sanctioned thieves, operating behind some highly respectable and upright facade.

So having money in Portugal doesn’t help you either, it just makes you a bigger target.

Ironically, it’s when you’re at your happiest that you run the greatest risk of a financial catastrophe happening in your life, like a big fraud, because you let your guard down and they take advantage of your positive emotions. Be very careful, in Portugal they don’t hesitate for a second to take advantage of people’s happiness to destroy their lives straight away!

Portugal is a “society” of criminals disguised as a democracy, spread literally across all strata of the country. This is the plain truth! Be very, very careful! If you think anything less than this, you’re in serious danger.

Portugal grinds up people’s lives!

It is impossible to be happy in Portugal because no one is happy and no one wants to see you happy. The Portuguese are much more concerned about making other people’s lives miserable than focusing on the happiness and success of their own lives. (sickening!)

The Portuguese in general are very mean and cruel people who take great pleasure in causing great suffering in others, especially emotionally and psychologically, whenever they have the opportunity or power to do so.

Definitely most Portuguese are swindlers, they just want your money! Be very, very careful if you give your money to a Portuguese, especially if it is a large sum, take maximum precautions, but even so, we will never know, because there is a high probability (compared to a developed country) that you will NEVER, EVER get it back! And if you go to a lawyer, (as is normal in any “normal” country, but you are in Poortugal), the Portuguese lawyer will just take advantage of your desperation to also con you and take all your money to resolve nothing, then the court will also rob you by charging you exorbitant fees, taxes and after many and many years of humiliation, waiting and repeatedly paying exorbitant sums to crooked lawyers and fraudulent Portuguese courts all you get is an insulting, preposterous and inconsequential judicial sentence and the acquittal of the criminal in the most flagrant disregard of the law with a complementary smile from the Portuguese judge.
You will receive lots of “arquivamento” (which means dismissed/filed, your case wasn’t even accepted by the court). Note that every time you appeal the “arquivamento” you will have to pay the Portuguese lawyers and courts all over again. This is how the farcical Portuguese legal system makes a fortune out of the desperation of its victims in this truly horrible fake “country” called Portugal.

There is probably nothing more stupid and criminal in the world than a Portuguese judge.
In fact, the majority of Portuguese are not fit to be judges, public prosecutors, lawyers and politicians, as they are totally unqualified to perform these absolutely crucial functions in any real democracy, which require acute intelligence, common sense and above all exceptional ethics and morals, the exact opposite of what the majority of Portuguese people are.

Actually, in my view, I don’t even think that the Portuguese are qualified or deserve to have their own country. In fact, Portugal is so full of unpunished criminals and evil people, like nowhere else in the world, that if the world were totally just, this truly diabolical place should simply be dismantled for the good of humanity.

Portuguese society is poor because most Portuguese are crooks and they are crooks because they are stupid, since they are incapable of creating any kind of good and wealth and earning money honestly.

Private car sales park in Portugal
What you see most in Portugal are personal cars parked in any free space on the street for sale, but most of them are lemons, or even in a state of near scrap. (Especially suburbs of big cities and most of the rest of the country) | The Real Portugal
The Portuguese often attribute everything that happens in their lives, including their own future, to God’s will. It’s actually a very lazy and convenient way of not taking responsibility for one’s own actions and decisions. Many of the most despicable and dishonest people are often the most pious, going to church every Sunday and always talking about Jesus, God and the Bible. They use the cloak of religion to hide their venom and their true selves (but not everyone is like that, of course).

The Portuguese population in general constantly mixes religion with witchcraft, which is a sure sign of primitive minds.

The Portuguese are the kind of people who, when they hear something (very) stupid, think it’s intelligent, and when they hear something intelligent (common sense), think it’s stupid.

You cannot carry adult conversations with adults in Portugal, because in general, the Portuguese are extremely difficult people to engage in an intelligent and meaningful conversation with, since we hear so much drivel and stupidity that our brains just want to shut down to end the agony, or else we just have to resort to talking about silly things with them, which they seem to love. In Portugal you’re always being intellectually assaulted, from everywhere.
Portugal is also a very infantilized society, most people seem to have a mental age of ten or five. There are no adults in Portugal. It’s children having children. As well as (undiagnosed, because most of the population is, so it’s the norm) mentally disabled people reproducing with mentally disabled people. Or often people of the same bloodline reproducing with others from the same bloodline. It’s all related in the end.

As a general rule, socializing with Portuguese condemns you to failure due to their toxic and defeated personality.

No one can achieve greatness by mixing with mediocre people, on the contrary, you’ll become mediocre too (unintentionally).

Mediocre people don’t want to work, learn and improve, they rather want people who work hard, like to learn and have talent to become mediocre like them.

It’s very difficult to be ourselves among the Portuguese, because they are intellectually and culturally very closed and inflexible people. What I mean is that they are extremely closed to the “outside” world and to other people who might think differently from them, and also because they are very basic people and don’t give a sh*t about the world and other cultures.

Portuguese street manhole cover expertise
Portuguese roads. No wonder that so many Portuguese cars drive on the road broken down. | The Real Portugal
The Portuguese hate to talk about serious matters, let alone criticize the decrepit state of their country, plagued by corruption, injustice and authorized thieves (to the point where Portuguese democracy has in fact been annulled, but no Portuguese realizes it!), conversely, they also hate to hear anyone praise the advantages of other countries. How can they improve their thoroughly broken country if no one criticizes anything or is willing to learn from the good and bad examples of others?
This fear of being criticized and aversion to praising others boils down to deep feelings of envy and inferiority complexes.

If you want to know anything serious and “real” about Portugal, the very last person you should ask is a Portuguese.

On a side note; I never envy anything or anyone (it only diminishes us), the good things we see should always serve as a source of inspiration and learning to improve ourselves and our lives, in my opinion.

Among other things, happiness lies in finding a goal in life, and putting in as much effort as possible to achieve it, something you’ll never be able to do successfully in extremely dysfunctional, evil and toxic Portugal, no matter what.

A group of Portuguese talking most of the time is like watching an endless chain reaction of unleashed stupidity. The Portuguese are completely devoid of any kind of common sense.

The Portuguese are seriously ignorant, illiterate and narrow-minded, including, amazingly, university graduates (it seems that instead of a brain they have a stone in their head, since they can’t change their rusty middle-aged ideas). Portugal is a country stood still in time. They are a people who neither have nor show interest or curiosity in anything more “complex” or “abstract”, but only in the little things of their petty lives and are only willing to learn what is strictly necessary in order to keep their jobs and not get fired. The Portuguese have no ambitions, no dreams, whatsoever! Just sad, empty, resigned and submissive minds and lives. Indeed, most Portuguese minds are a very, very dark place.

Most Portuguese don’t live, they just exist. They’re just waiting for the next day.

The life project of most Portuguese:
Eat 🍕 Sleep 🛌 Repeat 🔁

Which means that the Portuguese are exactly the perfect “docile” citizens to live under a dictatorship, because they don’t even care about it!

Actually, the phrase most often on the lips (and hidden in the minds) of the Portuguese is: “I don’t care!”.

Portugal has the peace of cowards.

Except for their football club, the Portuguese have no (real and serious) opinion about anything. Unlike in true democracies, there is no public opinion in Portugal, which is fatal, because public opinion is the essence, the heart that gives life and meaning to democracy.

People without any kind of intellectual curiosity is a solid sign of low intelligence, and by the way a generalized degree of mental deficiency is clearly noticeable in some of the Portuguese population, if you’ve lived there for some time you’ll know what I’m talking about. For some reason Brazilians call the Portuguese dumb and make a lot of jokes about them. As far as I’m concerned, I can fully attest to this bottomless Portuguese dumbness.

I firmly believe, based on my horrendous experience, that, in general, the Portuguese are probably the stupidest people on the face of the earth (as well as probably the most malicious).

Most Portuguese lack a real capacity for empathy, which is another sure sign of low intelligence and primitive minds, and which in itself is the cause of the Portuguese’s total lack of a sense of citizenship, i.e. caring for and respecting other citizens and not just selfishly looking out for themselves, as the Portuguese do. Democracy is being aware that you are a citizen among other citizens who have the same rights and duties as you. That’s why democracy is a TOTAL failure in Portugal. The Portuguese have no sense of citizenship and because of that, evil has taken over their “democracy”.

Unlike all other countries, with the exception of dictatorships, in Portugal there are virtually no spontaneous expressions of solidarity or indignation, be it public demonstrations, social media, other media, small or large, with their fellow citizens when it comes to, for example, outrageous cases of egregious injustice and violations of the most basic human rights practiced by the fraudulent Portuguese courts on a daily basis against their own citizens, which would bring any other country to its knees. Unfortunately, the truth is that the overwhelming majority of the Portuguese people actually take a sadistic pleasure in hearing about these cases of atrocious emotional and psychological suffering of others, or they simply don’t give a rat’s ass because there is nothing human about them. This fact alone is the greatest proof that almost all Portuguese are scum.

However, the Portuguese are extremely supportive of each other and united when it comes to harming, framing or scheming against someone, as well as when it comes to covering up the activities of crooks.

The Portuguese are only friendly on the surface, inside they are an ice cube.

Not to mention the total impunity for the massive and incessant theft of public funds by the generally corrupt ruling classes, which the incredibly stupid Portuguese, for the most part, find hilarious!

All this coldness and irrationality of the Portuguese, guided only by the most primal and animal instincts, which are not compatible with what makes us human and distinct from irrational animals, often makes us feel that we are dealing with an entire society of Stone Age people.

The truth is that there is not even a society in Portugal, just a bunch of savages looking out for themselves, no matter who has been hurt, no matter whose life has been ruined, no matter who has been wronged, no matter who has been robbed. Nobody cares about anybody in Portugal. Nobody cares about the collective.

The mentality of the Portuguese is not even third-world, that would be an upgrade, it really is a prehistoric cavemen mentality.

If we remain indifferent to the injustice and suffering of others, sooner or later we too will suffer the same fate. Democracy lives in each one of us and in the collective of the people, who must be active and vigilant citizens. When almost everyone constantly looks the other way, democracy dies and is SURELY taken over by criminals, as was the case in Portugal. And the great danger this poses for you is that the Portuguese don’t care or even comprehend what has happened to their country.


The guardians of democracy are not the politicians, they are the people. Politicians are just servants of the people.

In democratic terms, each individual is only as strong as the collective. When the collective is weak and lacks morals, decent people are automatically in danger.

There is no society in Portugal, only scum and cowards.

Potted plant full of cigarette butts at the entrance to a cafe in Portugal
Portuguese don’t know the difference between a garbage can and a plant pot: A plant pot full of garbage and cigarette butts at the entrance to a café in Portugal. The Portuguese are very slovenly, using a plant pot as if it were a garbage bin, and what’s even more incredible is that the café owners themselves don’t care about the image they convey to customers and don’t waste two minutes removing all this garbage from around the poor suffocated plant, or perhaps it’s not worth it because it will be full of garbage again in no time. | The Real Portugal
The Portuguese are only well when they are screwing/cheating each other.

Many Portuguese turn out to be “gente asquerosa” – truly obnoxious people.

In general, the Portuguese are rather gloomy people, many look unhealthy and aged, especially when they are over forty, in some localities they look very sad and miserable and strangely they seem to be always falling forward and walk quite slowly, as well as most of the time we can see them carrying a plastic bag or two. Occasionally, but much more than I would have expected, I saw many dragging their feet and limping. I’ve never seen so many lame people and with canes in one country (except in a country at war). I don’t know, but this must be caused by the lousy Portuguese public hospitals, you can come out worse than you went in and sometimes in a black bag. Portuguese public hospitals can be slaughterhouses. Professionals are miserably paid, apart from the higher ranked ones, and work long hours without adequate rest, when there are even doctors available to assist you, but primarily due to a lot of incompetence and irresponsibility. The problem with Portuguese public hospitals is that most of the time there are no issues, I think, but the probability of things going (extremely) wrong is very high, compared to a developed country, due to many random and idiotic reasons. Portuguese hospitals are like casinos, but the prizes are maladies and death. That is, when 112 answers and the ambulance doesn’t take years to get to you.

When you walk through the Portuguese suburbs and look around, you see so much misery, of all kinds, stamped on people’s faces, buildings and surroundings. This is the life that probably 95% of the Portuguese have.

Very poor Portuguese suburbs
When you see such profound misery, it is a clear sign that there is something very wrong and sick with this society and its people. (Of course, there are also very nice and modern apartments and houses, but these are only affordable by a very small minority of privileged people with salaries and wealth far above the Portuguese average). | The Real Portugal
Poortugal looks and smells poor almost everywhere you go.

Many Portuguese have a very strange way of greeting each other. In every country we say something like: “Hello! How are you?” and the other person will reply something like: “I’m fine, thank you!”. In Portugal it’s different, we say; “Hello! How are you?” and many (not all) answer; “Vou andando…” which translates into something like; “I’m dragging myself…” and if we say we’re fine like; “Esta tudo biem!” they look at us with a disappointed face, because they expect us to answer something even worse like; “I’m bursting with arthritis pain!”, so they can feel happy for the rest of the day.

Once I was in a Portuguese post office and while the clerk was assisting me, she was also chatting at length with two other colleagues, and then to my astonishment, I heard her say to her colleagues “It’s a good thing that I’m getting old, this way I’m closer to retirement” (a woman maybe only in her late forties, a young person in my opinion). Wow! This perfectly reflects the “fighting spirit” of the Portuguese people (sarc). Is it possible to be more defeatist? You can change your job, move to another country, you can change everything and learn anything at any age if you truly set your mind to it. But giving up on living? No wonder Portugal is what it is… I have no doubt that most Portuguese reach the age of 40 and start thinking about retirement.

Portugal is a country of mostly elderly people and young, middle-aged people who already feel old with exactly the same old ideas, the same conversations, the same conformism and lack of dreams, and even the same mannerisms. There is no generation gap in Portugal.

Generally speaking, children become perfect clones of their parents regarding toxic mentality, backwardness, primitive habits and culture, as well as total absence of moral values, also due to the very poor education of the majority of Portuguese parents.

Most of the Portuguese don’t know how to parent because they don’t even know how to take care of themselves.

Very strangely, I’ve also noticed that most of the streets in any big or small city in Portugal, apart from the tourist areas, are almost always empty or with very few people, i.e. Portuguese people, lifeless streets, no human sounds, voices, laughter. Very bizarre and gloomy.

In addition, the Portuguese, in general, are also very lazy and incompetent, and it doesn’t matter if he/she is a bricklayer or a lawyer. In this respect, I’ve discovered that, deep down, the Portuguese are mentally very similar, the only thing that changes is the title of the profession.
They say this proverb and then laugh “Não é para fazer, é para se fazendo”, which roughly translates to – It’s not to do, it’s to keep doing and keep doing and keep doing… (so without ever finishing the task). They also have another saying: “Lei do menos esforso” The law of least effort. So, this “culture” and lack of work ethic explains very well why Portugal is such a backward and eternally postponed country.

In general, Portugal is a country of losers, inept and very envious people. Portuguese are also notoriously passive-aggressive people.
Many Portuguese are also holders of an icy cruelty, in any of its forms.

Compared to developed countries, Portuguese roads can be (very) dangerous, so it’s very prudent to drive defensively and be very alert when driving in Portugal, because there are too many Portuguese drivers who are idiots on wheels and there is a general lack of civility. Only by driving defensively have I avoided many accidents, some of which could, perhaps, have been fatal, in addition, if you do have an accident the insurance company will send you straight to court, which you will most certainly lose, after spending a fortune and trashing at least a decade of your life.

Many Portuguese drive too fast and recklessly or too slow and foolishly.

Also be very careful when crossing crosswalks. Before crossing, make sure the car is really stopping, otherwise you could be hit by a car. I’ve seen many near misses!

Mandatory payment under extortion to street car valets in Portugal
Every place that has a parking meter is sure to have a leech waiting to extort money from you under the threat of scratching your car when you leave. Obviously, the Portuguese police don’t give a damn, so they’re always at ease to extort you. | The Real Portugal
If a Portuguese is lucky enough to have a better salary, many will turn into futile and outrageous human beings, empty shells covered with brands and accessories. This type of person lives only on appearances, sustained by huge credit card debts. They don’t know that it’s not the outside that counts, but the inside (a cliché, but very true). This type of person needs all these paraphernalia to validate themselves. Just because they wear brands, they automatically think they’re better than everyone else. They measure themselves by the number of brands they display and not by their intrinsic value as human beings. Don’t get me wrong, I love good things and good quality/price brands, but those things don’t define me, of course.
I’ve also witnessed a couple throw away almost new (good quality) clothes, shoes, bags, etc. with frightening regularity and then go on a shopping spree to buy them all again just for the sake of buying more stuff, but what frightened me the most was seeing these sick people criminally throwing supermarket bags full of unopened food packaging in perfect condition into the garbage bin! (However, I don’t believe this is a common occurrence though, it was just one couple I saw doing it).

Portuguese are a mixture of meanness and mental retardation (which is not perceptible at first sight), and that is the root of all the evils that happen in this fake country.
It’s not the country that makes the people, it’s the people who make a country. That’s why Portugal is a sh*thole, because most Portuguese are sh*tty human beings. I consider meanness to be a defect of nature, so most Portuguese are born defective.

I sometimes use the “heavy” words, mental deficiency to describe some Portuguese people because, frankly, there is no other way to properly describe the extremely disconcerting, disturbing and bizarre behavior of many of them, their constantly preposterous and bizarre responses to serious issues, their boundless rudeness (it doesn’t happen very often, but when it does, the level of rudeness, impudence, contempt and shocking lack of respect can be staggering and so infuriating and it comes from where you least expect it), and especially their total lack of empathy, not human. Of course, it can’t just be plain stupidity, it has to be something else that comes from their very bad genes! There’s definitely something very wrong with the Portuguese people’s heads. (These aspects reveal themselves above all when you need them most, in serious situations (i.e. happened with some of my lawyers), or when you’ve known them for a while, and not necessarily in casual situations). However, the total absence of empathy of the Portuguese people in general is innate, very profound and chilling (and above all not human).

The Portuguese are also the world’s greatest experts at cynically distorting facts and the truth out of sheer malice and infinite stupidity, as I’ve never seen anywhere else.

It is well known that from the beginning of Portuguese history until today there has been a lot of inbreeding and alcohol abuse, starting in the villages and reaching the big cities in the poorest areas, and that it takes place within the family secret (it also happens with animals, but that’s another story), and as frightening as it is, it is still very common among the poorest people for Portuguese children to consume alcohol, provided by their OWN parents and relatives, something they call “sopa do cavalo cansado” – a very toxic mixture of bread and alcohol (more alcohol than bread) that is given to children out of gross negligence, laziness and sheer ignorance, which has obviously seriously deteriorated Portuguese genetics and continues to do so.

The Portuguese are very racist and xenophobic towards Europeans and Americans and indeed, bizarrely, towards ALL aspects of foreign cultures in general. An anecdote: Once I was on a terrace and heard a Portuguese woman praising French cheeses, and immediately a spiteful Portuguese man at the table with her got angry at her and said, “Why are you talking about French cheeses?! We have very good cheeses!” How pathetic! Even with foreign food, the Portuguese are “racist”! I’m sure the Portuguese are also “racist” towards the natural landscapes and cities of other countries!
Their country is a utterly dysfunctional and undemocratic society (its state institutions are a veritable fraud posing as a democracy), but they like to shout that Portugal is one of the best and the greatest countries to live in, (during Euro 2021, there was a very awkward and embarrassing campaign in all Portuguese media stating the following: “We are Giants! We are Huge! We are the Best!”. Is it possible to be more pathetic?! An eternally bankrupt country always with outstretched hands perpetually living off other people’s generosity and money! Really!? How can you be great if you live permanently on the dole? On the other hand, they love to bash Europeans and Americans, which only reveals their sheer ignorance, stupidity and inferiority complex. There’s nothing wrong with wanting to be great, quite the opposite, but you have to work for it, right?! And it clearly doesn’t help to live perpetually on the dole of other countries.

Only when you, Portuguese, start to give to others, will you be able to say, if you wish, that you are a great country. However, when you are REALLY great, you are also modest.

Unfortunately, the only thing in which Portugal is indisputably the best in the whole world is crookedness and mediocrity!

Portuguese people mindset
The overwhelming majority of the Portuguese population has this mindset, because they are people without any humanity towards others and are only centered on themselves and their most primitive instincts and, in general the Portuguese are also people who are very poorly adapted to today’s modern world in every respect. Most Portuguese haven’t evolved beyond the Australopithecus state. Sure enough, the Australopithecus lives in Portugal. | The Real Portugal
The Portuguese are probably the most cowardly and spineless people in the world, as they would rather bury their heads in the sand than fight and claw back their country from the criminals who have usurped their democracy. However, this will never happen because for most of them it is: “If I could I would do the same”, “Too bad it’s not me”, and so on… There are no MEN and WOMEN with capital letters in Portugal.

In Portugal, it’s not a question of us (the good guys) against them (the bad guys), because in the end the monolithic crooked mentality and lack of morality is common to all. They all seem to be connected by the same wire.

Poortuguese actually admire dishonest people. We hear people say all the time that the scum are very intelligent and sophisticated, but they never call them corrupt, crooks or thieves. It’s as if there are no bad people in Portugal! (And they like it even more when it’s the president of their beloved football club who’s a big-time crook).
They even defend them, including journalists and commentators on television and in the media in general (literally or by not telling the whole truth). Only a crook and an idiot could say that another crook is clever and sophisticated, but not a crook. (What is clever about taking other people’s money?) Your lawyer, whom you pay dearly, will tell you the same thing and even find it very funny! Portuguese people are truly insane!

Have you ever noticed that all the people who say that crooks are very smart people and not criminals are always losers? I’ve never seen a person who is intelligent and successful by talent and merit (apart from being decent, of course) admire crooks. That’s why the vast majority of Poortuguese admire crooks, because they were born big losers and will die big losers, and they know it every day when they look at their ugly mugs in the mirror.

In Portugal, stealing isn’t stealing, it’s being smart!

The only thing that makes us being us, is our integrity, without it we are nothing.

Moreover, it’s very easy to be a con artist in Portugal. Even a monkey could be one, all the thief has to do is simply keep other people’s money for whatever pretext (it doesn’t even have to be a scheme, it can indeed be any kind of legitimate business), and it is absolutely certain that nothing will happen to the thief under the law, on the contrary, the thief will be protected tooth and nail by the Portuguese dictatorial “inJustice” system. Also be very aware that all the supposedly “legal” documents and contracts are of no “real” use and do not provide any “real” protection in Portugal, so, in case you are defrauded, you are automatically screwed FOREVER, 99.9% of the time! The Poortuguese State itself is a con artist!

When you arrive in Portugal, you are no longer an American, Dutch, British, Spanish or any other citizen, you are just a sack of potatoes for the Portuguese Government/State and will be treated as such. Furthermore, you become as defenseless as a fish in a fishbowl.

In Portugal, you can’t trust anything or any amount that you can’t afford to lose, because if you get robbed (defrauded), it’s final, there’s no safety net, there is no “real” legal protection, it’s all fake.
And if you try to recover the stolen money (or any other kind of value in general), the only thing that will happen is that you’ll “lose” a lot more money, your life will come to a halt, and endless years will be wasted when you could be doing a lot more interesting things with your precious life. This is guaranteed to happen 99.9% of the time.

Be aware that in Portugal, criminals do not have a criminal record!

In Portugal, you are never the first victim.

Literally, when you hand over your money to someone in Portugal, especially large sums, there is nothing, ABSOLUTELY nothing “lawful” (real), to stop that person from taking your money, and that thief will still be protected by the law against you, the stolen victim.

In Portugal, it’s not that you were unlucky to be scammed, it’s more like, you were lucky not to be scammed (deliberately or out of sheer incompetence).

In Portugal, not all businessmen are fraudsters, but almost all fraudsters are “respectable” businessmen.

Don’t trust anything or anyone in Portugal (both people and state/government bodies). Almost everything in Portugal is not what it seems.

That’s why the greatest security you can give yourself in Poortugal is not to need anything or anyone like a hospital, a doctor, insurance, a lawyer or even mundane things like a plumber, an electrician, etc. In other words, you can never get sick and you have to be as independent and autonomous as possible.

Because in Poortugal you can only rely on yourself.

The truth is that literally ANY and EVERY legal business in Portugal can be a long-standing authorized scam or a major fraud, sanctioned and protected by law, and no one will warn you and it’s not even written down anywhere! For foreigners it’s even more dangerous because we are much more vulnerable. That’s why the most coveted prize for a Portuguese crook is to steal money from a foreigner.

I have no doubt that most of the Portuguese economy is sustained by scamming, stealing and ripping off foreigners. Because practically every business that depends only on Portuguese customers goes bankrupt.

Generally speaking, the official financial statements of companies cannot be trusted either; they are heavily manipulated and conceal a great deal, and in any case they are not available to the public.

Ironically, the more money you have, the more danger you run in Poortugal, for the simple fact that you are carrying a big target on your back when you have a lot of coveted valuables that can be stolen or “lost” legally or in some other completely arbitrary and erratic way (including for the swindling Portuguese state), such as; depositing the money in a Portuguese bank and it “disappears” overnight with all your money (it happens all the time)! I can’t say it enough: NEVER bring your money to Portugal! EVER! EVER! EVER!
There are 1,001 ways to get stolen in Portugal and they are all legal (explicitly or in practice).

If you’re rich and you come to Poortugal, you’re guaranteed to go broke!

You cannot make money grow in Portugal; you can only make it disappear.

Portugal is the land of impunity and injustice! Where criminals have lifelong immunity.

In Portugal, even donations and charities are pretty much all scams, especially when it comes to giving money. No matter how kind-hearted you are, unfortunately you can never trust any.

A truly egregious example of this for its enormous human dimension was that even in a disaster as terrible as the devastating fire of Pedrógão Grande in 2017, which caused 66 deaths and 253 injuries, destroyed about 500 homes, of which 261 were permanent homes, and 50 businesses, the victims were stolen, most of whom never received the aid that was supposed to be for them, including millions of euros in personal donations, and many people even went hungry without access to food. These people, left without homes or anything else, were stolen by the mayor himself, his family and friends. They took practically all of the victims’ money, and in the end they were all acquitted by the farcical Poortuguese courts, as always! Portugal is a country of criminals and monsters like nowhere else in the world, starting with the endless criminals who are part of the state machine itself! Portugal is a truly odious country that seriously should and must be abolished because it has no use in the world except to shelter and protect criminals!

In Portugal, if you are swindled, you can’t even say you were robbed by a crook, because according to the authorities, you are defaming the honor of an honorable person, and you will pay dearly for that sin. The only name I can give to such a place is the land of Satan. Portugal is definitely the land of Satan! Run as fast as you can!

So, almost everything in Portugal turns out to be a scam in one way or another, starting with the very concept of Portugal as a developed and democratic “country”, which is a very dangerous fraud and a total lie that will trap your life.

The bottom line is that the scam is not just the endless individual crooks who proliferate in Portugal with impunity for a lifetime, the great scam is the very concept of Portugal as a normal, serious country that abides by the rule of law, which is an absolute lie, and the EXACT opposite is true.

Be very careful, because what I am saying is the absolute truth! All, literally all of the “democratic” institutions of the Portuguese state, in their overwhelming majority, are taken over and run by criminals (thieves and corrupt to the bone), who would be rotting in jail anywhere else in the world, but in Portugal they are revered by the population, who are exactly the same. Portugal has so many criminals that the best thing to do would be to turn the “country” into a prison with walls around it, and that would solve the problem right away. They are not needed at all!
The world does not know what it is dealing with! But that is why this blog exists.

Never set foot in Poortugal! Poortugal has only nightmares in store for you!

Portugal is a criminal state run by criminals for criminals, with the connivance of a brainless population. I can’t get any clearer than that! You have been informed.

Portugal’s pseudo-democratic and state institutions, (justice, politics, etc.), are taken over by criminals, for the most part, and criminally incompetent people, who do whatever they want. This is the essence of Portugal, and it is what the EU and the rest of the world have to deal with.

It goes without saying that doing business in Portugal is walking on a minefield, to say the least. For all sorts of reasons.

Most Portuguese are like the low-cost version of a person: faulty and totally unreliable.

The Portuguese people remind me of an Italian movie from the 80s “Ugly, Dirty and Bad”, but without being funny.

The truth is that, behind the mask, the Portuguese are generally people of extremely bad quality on all levels.

If you pay more than 50 euros to any Portuguese, you’re probably paying too much for what you’re getting. (I’m not including salaries, of course).

The majority of the Portuguese population is communist to some degree, even those who vote for mainstream political parties are full of communist “ideals”. Most civil servants are affiliated to Portuguese Communist parties (yes, there are so many “flavors” of Communist parties in Portugal, even the Green Party, which in Portugal is not a genuine, independent Green Party at all, but just a proxy of the Portuguese Communist Party, which can also happen with other small political parties on the periphery).
There’s even a Communist Party every year! The TV channels and all the Portuguese media talk about it ad nauseam for several weeks and, until this communist party is over, they are always on TV! Even the comedians in Portugal are communists! (You just want to run away as fast as possible!)

Although I’m not talking about normal left-wing parties, I’m talking about extreme far left-wing parties that practice the abominable, genocidal and very dangerous doctrine of Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism. Only in retarded Portugal…

I’ve never seen so many communist sickles in my life, they’re all over the streets on posters and billboards. If you don’t know better, you would think you were transported to the former Soviet Union, even many apartment blocks look like they came straight out of the former Iron Curtain countries. There’s no doubt that the communist doctrine fits like a glove with the deviant personality traits of most Portuguese (lack of character, envy, malice, losers…).

However, I must say that Portugal is an amalgamation of corrupt and crooks everywhere, so politically it’s all the same, even if there are one or two parties on the fringes of politics that may or may not be different. As a whole, I should say that there are no good or bad political parties, because they are all nauseatingly bad and corrupt to the bone, but that doesn’t mean that individually there aren’t people of integrity in all parties, who sooner or later are invariably silenced and marginalized by the overwhelming majority of sleazy crooks and cowards inside the party machines.

Deep down, this is how the whole of Portuguese society works, the bad constantly drives out the good, that is, the scoundrels and the mediocrities get fiercely together to push out those with integrity and talent, and unfortunately they succeed because human trash is the absolute majority in Portugal.

If you watch some Portuguese national TV channels and can endure the pain in your brain, you will see that all day long the Portuguese watch and adore news and pseudo-debates all day long about their corrupt and filthy football system and its crooks, including petty things like what the corrupt club president and other crooks had for breakfast or how they are spending their vacations, and the same goes for the thieving Portuguese corrupt politicians and mafia bankers who have stolen billions from the Portuguese and are never arrested. They watch television programs with sly hosts and pseudo comedians who make you cringe, with audiences populated by people who don’t even know how to clap, when they clap, they raise their elbows in the air as if they were about to take off.

How Recycling Is Done In Portugal
A Portuguese woman once told me “They don’t pay me to recycle”. Now I know what she meant! | The Real Portugal
There is an absolutely promiscuous and corrupt relationship between Portuguese politics, football, banks and the Portuguese courts and their judges ensuring that these crooks are all well protected by the “law”. They all help each other getting richer and richer at the expense of the Portuguese and the EU taxpayers and the Portuguese becoming poorer and poorer, but the Portuguese population is so unbelievable stupid, that don’t even realize that it is their money that is being stolen, including the EU money, that is supposed to be smartly and rationally invested in their economy so that the Portuguese can have a better quality of life, instead they are increasingly getting poorer and poorer. As I said, they admire those who steal from them! If you ask any Portuguese, it seems that in Portugal there are no thieves, corrupt and crooks, but instead there are only very smart guys! And they even think it’s all very funny and they laugh about it! Hence the innate mental deficiency and ingrained dishonesty.

For the Portuguese, an intelligent person is not someone who creates wealth and value, but someone who steals.

And another terribly devastating thing for those who live in Portugal is that the memories of your life start to be permanently soiled by all the scum you meet along the way as you “try” to have a normal life there, and it’s even worse when you have problems. The more years you live in Portugal, the more the story of your life is soiled by all the Portuguese trash that surrounds you and suffocates you instead of creating happy memories. You don’t want that, it’s a sentence that no good person deserves! Run away, run away from Poortugal! The place where the devil lives!

For most Portuguese, just as a crook is seen as an intelligent person, an honest person is seen as a stupid person (and, of course, a potential prey).

There is no doubt that the majority of Portuguese people exhibit all the psychological traits of sociopaths (i.e. using/manipulating others for their own benefit, a total lack of human feelings, as well as utter contempt for the suffering of others).

One day I was in a restaurant, having dinner with my wife, when I happened to overhear the person next to me, among a group of friends, saying to his friend, who was talking about a company that seemed to me to be his competitor, that if he wanted, he could give him information about his competitor, since he was his client and had privileged access to that information, I don’t know what kind of information they were talking about, but obviously it is not to be shared with third parties. That’s right, having a business in Portugal is what you are subject to, and much more.

A Portuguese once told me in a casual conversation about government spending, “o dinheiros deles” which means “their money”. Unbelievable! This Portuguese doesn’t even know what taxes are and that there is no such thing as “THEIR money”, it is “OUR money”, the taxpayers’ money, the money of all Portuguese. With citizens of this caliber, no wonder Poortugal is such a mess!

Ironically, and completely oblivious to the seriousness and stupidity of what she was saying. Regarding Portugal, this person ended up telling the absolute truth! In Portugal, they literally make the money of the Portuguese people their own to steal and squander at will with real impunity (and with the agreement/consent of the majority of the population).

In fact, the corrupt politicians are the ones the Portuguese keep electing. The more corrupt and dirty they are, the more chances they have to get elected. It happens all the time!
Therefore, Portugal’s problems come from the root, from the population to the elites, and not the other way around. The corrupt elites are just a reflection/continuation of the mindset of the Poortuguese population, and in the end most of them are just competing for a chance to steal too. It’s a never ending cycle that feeds from the bottom up.

The most corrupt Poortuguese Prime Minister ever (at least as far as I know), who has stolen and damaged the country to the tune of billions of Euros, directly and indirectly for generations to come (but we’ll never know the real figure), has been elected twice in a row (and I’m sure that if he were to run again today, the very dumb Portuguese would mostly vote for this piece of trash again!) Needless to say, this criminal is completely free, lives in a luxurious villa by the sea, and everyone can see him jogging carefree through the streets and (amazingly!) signing autographs and posing for selfies with the very idiotic and dishonest Portuguese population, who treat him like a rock star instead of the scumbag he is, who stole the country and himself and bankrupted the country, which then had to be bailed out once again with the other people’s money, this time by the Troika (basically EU and US money, the money from OUR pockets (again!).
This criminal, like so many other countless despicable Portuguese thieves, both political and civilian, are not imprisoned or even tried for their real crimes, but (when they are) are only tried for insignificant trifles in completely sham trials that always end in nothing (just like a dictatorship, which is what it is!).

This criminal, if he were in the United States or another EU country, would already be sentenced probably to at least 10 life sentences! But in Poortugal he is a rock star! Need I say more about the total lack of morals (and intelligence) of the Portuguese people?

Portuguese people from all walks of life look at the biggest abnormalities that happen every day in their fetid country as if they were the most normal things possible.

Portugal produces no relevant wealth of any kind and contributes absolutely zero (in the grand scheme of things) to the progress of humanity (e.g. science, technology, art…). This is due to the fact that practically the entire Portuguese economy and society is based on deceit, fraud, theft, corruption, nepotism, cronyism, patronage, connivance and lies. This is what the Portuguese feed on.

It is no coincidence that everything the Portuguese touch turns into 💩.

Such an “economy” is absolutely unsustainable because it produces almost no value and only takes (steals) until there’s nothing left to steal.

Portugal is a country in a constant process of self-destruction.

While the world in general is on the verge of, and has already entered, an unprecedented era of exponential technological and human development, Portugal is a sinking boat with many holes, that has reached the point of no return!

If the progress of humanity depended on Portuguese society, we would all still be digging potatoes. However, real European countries of similar or smaller size have always contributed and continue to contribute immensely to the progress of humanity (e.g. Switzerland, Denmark, and so on). While Portugal mostly produces sh*tty people with two brain cells. As a matter of fact, practically everything is sh*tty in (Poo)tugal.

Poortugal is the biggest nest and the biggest scum factory in the world!

Portuguese society is like a prison yard, but without guards.

Portugal is an eternally sick (more like terminally ill) country, that needs to be permanently plugged into the life support machine (EU money) in order to survive. Taking Europe out of the equation, Portugal isn’t worth 2 euros.

If Germany is the locomotive 🚄 of Europe, then Poortugal is the ox cart 🐂 of Europe.

Portugal is a diabolical and deeply disturbing, insane “society” that will most likely seriously traumatize you if you don’t recognize it and get out in time, where everything is constantly pushing you down. Fortunately, that’s what this website is for, to warn people of the danger they are in.

Because deep down, what lies behind all this endless evil, cruelty and stupidity that is so uniquely Portuguese and has no parallel anywhere else in the world, is the existence of a pseudo-society that is actually made up of mostly crazy people, but who pass themselves off as perfectly normal people, yet constantly utter the most outrageous/idiotic statements and act in the most insane ways with the greatest naturalness. This goes all the way through society, from ordinary citizens to the highest public officials. In Portugal, the crazy people are the normal people, and the really normal people (with common sense, who speak the truth) are the ones who are labelled as crazy.

The words that best define life in Portugal: Chaos, Arbitrariness, Insanity, Evil.

Only integrity, brains and hard work make life and civilization evolve. In Portugal there is none, quite the opposite.

Basically, in Portugal we live surrounded by a dreadful society made up of vermin and profoundly imbecile people, making it impossible to have a pleasant and productive life there, more like trying to build a life in a cross between a madhouse and an open sewer (humanly speaking).

Intelligent people create value, while stupid people steal and cheat, which is why almost everyone in Portugal is a fraud.

In view of all this, to call the Portuguese human and rational beings is an insult to humanity.

There was a car dealership owner who once told me, to my great shock, that “this prime minister only stole some money, but he didn’t hurt anyone. Didn’t hurt anyone?! Of course not, he and his friends simply stole and damaged the country to the tune of innumerable billions of euros through corrupt contracts! But even if he had stolen 100 euros, it would be a crime that indicated that he was not a trustworthy person, and therefore, evidently, could not continue to exercise the functions of Prime Minister of Portugal. I really can’t understand and classify this kind of reaction, which is very typical of the Portuguese. It certainly reveals a mixture of mental deficiency and deep-rooted dishonesty. Imagine what it would be like to buy a car from this imbecile as well of course, a crook.

If you listen to, or even worse, watch Portuguese popular music (música pimba), almost all of it will cause you excruciating brain pain, yet most Portuguese people love it. That explains a lot!

There are no perfect countries, far from it, and of course there are such people in every country, but the big difference is that in Portugal it is endemic, it is the norm, the ratio of bad people to good people is completely reversed in Portugal compared to a developed country, from my anecdotal experience, approximately 95% of the Portuguese manifest some degree of these very serious character flaws, and therefore only around 5% of the population is genuinely trustworthy, reliable, upright and who really care about the dire situation, but very unfortunately totally powerless to change anything against such an overwhelming majority of bad people and useful idiots. Of course, not all of the 95% are active crooks but they are conniving and have the same attitude and as such they are somehow weak, passive, cowards, envious, simpletons, disinterested, selfish, callous, dishonest, very stupid, indifferent to evil, thieves by opportunity, lacking morals people, who always look the other way (therefore, most of them end up being the same in terms of (lack of) moral values and crook mindset), which makes them just as guilty/responsible and just as much a part of the problem because they let it all happen under their noses and don’t know or even care about exercising their rights and using their vote to their advantage (i.e. punishing corrupt politicians and fighting the criminals who have taken over their country and monstrous injustices by any (within reason) means necessary. That is, to man up!).

These people exhibit all the characteristics of the numb, meek, apathetic, uncritical, submissive citizens of a third world dictatorship country, but with some very perverse quirks that are so typical of the Portuguese population, which is why when you arrive in Portugal you are in for a big shock (that is, when you leave the tourist circuit) you’ll think you’ve fallen out of Europe, and indeed truly you have, European civilization stops in Spain, many places in Portugal look like an extension of Morocco, perhaps even half of the Portuguese population looks like North Africans to me (which, of course, I am not intending as a good or bad thing, it’s just a personal observation, but I am making it clear so as not to be misunderstood), and of course people’s appearance is totally irrelevant, what counts is their integrity. 100%!

Qualities of the Portuguese (in general): Very unfortunately I can’t think of any, but they are usually very friendly in the tourist sector, or in casual conversations, unfortunately this is all superficial, because when you (really) need them and the system you only have problems that can become very dangerous, as was the case with me, although I can mention that the food is really good, at least for my taste, but only if you are lucky enough to know the very few good restaurants, because the norm is plenty of scams and mediocrity (as well as poor hygiene and food unfit for consumption) in the catering sector like, not surprisingly, almost everything in Portugal.

I’ve also had occasional encounters with helpful, competent and polite Portuguese, but that only proves the rule.

I MUST point out that there are always EXCEPTIONS to EVERYTHING I say that is bad about Portugal and the Portuguese people!

So, of course it’s not all bad in Portugal, there are many positive and pleasant aspects, but unfortunately in the face of all that is very bad and the big picture, these positive things end up being totally irrelevant. Portugal could be splendid, but without the Portuguese people (i.e. the general crookedness and callousness of 95% of the population).

Portugal is not the beaches, Portugal is the Portuguese people.

However, in the end what makes a Portuguese is not the place where he/she was born, but rather having a so typical Portuguese “twisted” evil and callous mentality.

For me, decent people don’t even have a nationality, we are all fundamentally the same, but unique.

When I talk about decent people, I don’t mean perfect people, I personally have many more faults than qualities, I’m just not dishonest and I distinguish good from evil, which is what makes us human in the end.

So, obviously there are decent, honest, hardworking, very intelligent, competent and talented people in Portugal who work very hard, usually just to survive (due to the very toxic and vicious environment that crushes them on a daily basis), not to live, although they are rare gems, and this article is not about them.

If you’re honest, hard-working and talented, there are an infinite number of ways to become poor in Poortugal, and none to become rich.

The (genuinely and not superficially) honest people in Portugal are so rare that you can’t find them or even know who they are, and even if you do find them, they are not much help in the midst of all the rot that exists in Portugal. (they need help too)

The decent Portuguese who really care are a very tiny minority in a sea of unscrupulous people and nitwits, so it’s impossible to win! You have my full sympathy, and I personally say, if you are a good person, you don’t deserve to waste your life in that hellhole, which will inevitably cancel you out as a unique and valuable human being, one way or another, sooner or later! Portugal is a dystopian society that will surely crush all your dreams and will never let you to be you!

Portugal is the country of death! Everything withers and dies, nothing flourishes and your happiness is the first to die!

It is a fact that many people in Portugal sooner or later suffer a catastrophic and irreversible blow to their lives, from which they can never recover, because the country abandons them, or rather, is not even there for them.

It should also be noted that the human quality in Portugal is deteriorating instead of improving, since most of the decent people leave the country as soon as they have a chance.

The only good plan to have in Portugal is the plan to escape Portugal. Any other plan will only lead you ultimately into a black hole that will be very difficult to get out of.

The big problem is that when you are in Portugal, you can only turn to Portuguese people for important matters, right up to the last resort, and they will more often than not just make your problems worse instead of helping you out (individually and collectively speaking), and that’s why you are always getting more and more screwed in Portugal, because you can only deal with Portuguese people and Portuguese institutions all the time. In most cases, if you are dependent on Portuguese people (for important issues), your life is sure to become a living hell without you ever being able to solve your problem. Which is the same as saying that you’re always dependent on the help of scum (individually and collectively) who aren’t in the slightest bit interested in helping you and seeing you do well, quite the opposite.

It’s you alone against an entire country that genuinely doesn’t give a damn about you and wants to see you fail.

As a rule, you can never make a wrong right in Portugal, the wrong just gets wronger and wronger (the more serious the matter, the worse), which puts you in a limbo of eternal terrible suffering.

That is, in Portugal you only get (more) problems, you never solve problems, especially the serious ones.

I have never seen a more disgusting, aberrant and odious country than Portugal!

I wonder how Mother Nature could have done something as bad as the Portuguese. (for the most part)

We don’t get many shots in life, so be very careful with Poortugal, because the least that will happen to you once you get there is that you are guaranteed to become impoverished and waste a large part of your resources, precious years of your life, as well as your mental sanity, as I said, nobody who is honest, competent, and hardworking can become even relatively wealthy in Portugal. Unfortunately, this may make it even more difficult for you to leave. Poortugal is like quicksand, once you fall into this shit, it can become very difficult to get out (that is, in good standing) if you run out of resources.

The longer you stay in Poortugal, the poorer you become.

I have certainly met many friendly people in Portugal, but that doesn’t mean that they are trustworthy and will act in good faith and with due diligence to help you when you need them. There’s a big difference between sitting on a beautiful terrace, soaking up the sun, drinking a cold beer and being attended to by a friendly waiter, or needing service and having to rely on a Portuguese person or institution. Depending on the severity of the situation, your life can be destroyed in the blink of an eye and you’ll never see it coming, as was my case.

There’s a world of difference between being nice and being an inherently righteous person. Never mistake one for the other.

What makes Portugal so dangerous is that, at first glance and on the surface (I’ve had many wonderful times in Portugal and I miss the sea, the food and the sun, because Portugal, in my opinion, is sincerely REALLY great as a region and full of untapped potential (unfortunately, its natural beauty is very badly managed and taken advantage of), but as I said before, without the Portuguese people), it seems like a very nice place to live in; Nice people (on the surface), pleasant weather, lots of sunshine, great beaches from north to south and good food (in the few places), but that’s not enough to offset the atmosphere of extreme mediocrity, ineptitude, envy and legalized crookedness among the general population, which can literally reach any degree of severity, and which from the outset prevents you from being what you want to be, regardless of all your abilities and efforts, the anti-democratic institutions that don’t work at all when and where it really matters, public institutions infested and run by corrupt and very incompetent and lazy people, a downright fraudulent and corrupt judicial system that exists to serve itself and its corrupt political and civil “friends”, therefore to protect the scum and punish the good citizens just like in a dictatorship, which IT IS, since Portugal’s supposedly democratic institutions have been completely usurped by the corrupt, the criminal and the mediocre (and the Portuguese don’t mind one bit about it, because they are equal). Needless to say, all of this poses a great danger to your life and makes your life in Portugal extremely tenuous and ultimately pointless.

Warning. Extremely dangerous! In Portugal you have no real democratic, civil or human rights! IT’S ALL FAKE !!! The reason for this ignominious situation is the Portuguese themselves, who have undermined democracy and the rule of law, because most of them are, morally speaking, rats in sheepskins, scattered throughout all layers of Portuguese society. This Portuguese stinking shitocracy is the “great” creation of the Portuguese, and IT IS the spitting image of the very low quality of the Portuguese people in general. Poortugal is sinking in its own shit and stupidity!

Be warned! In a nutshell, Portugal is overwhelmingly a country of criminals and criminally minded people.

To put it bluntly, Portugal is nothing more than a tyrannical mafia of countless criminals who dictate the country and fiercely protect countless other criminals, with the total connivance of almost an entire population that is the same, actively or passively. If Portugal wasn’t a country that cowardly takes refuge in its sovereignty, it would have been dismantled long ago as the criminal organization that it is, and probably half of its population, made up of “legalized” criminals and crooks, would be behind bars or suffering some kind of legal penalties, or else interned in asylums! This is Portugal and it’s absolutely true! You have been warned, don’t believe it at your own peril.

The best gift I can give you is that you now know. And so you can defend yourself.

I didn’t have anyone to warn me!

And in the end, I realise that I can only describe 1% of what it’s like to live in Poortugal in this entire blog, because there are no words in the dictionary, in any dictionary in the world, that are strong enough to describe and classify the true reality of what it’s like to live in Poortugal, surrounded and dependent on these creatures of darkness for years and years, for any decent person with more than two brain cells in their head. Even if the blog one day has a million articles about Poortugal and the Portuguese, it will never be able to convey the true, enormous and agonising terror of living in this hellhole surrounded by these damned creatures of darkness called Portuguese, where only a creature of darkness could enjoy living.

Very enlightening Portuguese news:
Golden Visas: they invest in Portugal, and end up being deceived
Portuguese judge forces aggressor to dinner with victim
Strong evidence of gross negligence in Portuguese public hospital
Had to wait 12 years for justice with his life destroyed
Costa & Sócrates, the 600 million euros and the fired journalist
Dentist scams clients and practices psychological terror in clinics
Housing fraud “We wanted to believe in our dream”
They bought a “house”, but live in “tourist accommodation”. Hundreds could lose the right to use the house they bought
“Shit In The Mouth” custom practiced by the Portuguese in the Middle Ages
Strong evidence of gross negligence in Portuguese hospital
Elderly German couple savagely murdered in Portugal
Honest lawyer who denounced corrupt man forced to pay a fine of 4,800 euros by Portuguese “justice”
Portuguese Parliament functions as a “shopping mall of corruption
Mega-fraud in the financial support for the reconstruction of houses burned in the fire of Pedrógão Grande, which caused 66 deaths
Tax officials took possession of passengers’ suitcases at Lisbon airport
A Spanish doctor and his team operated as much in 6 days as 5 doctors in a year and for half the price charged in private
Isaltino, the corrupt mayor that the Portuguese adore
Punching a woman’s eardrum and hitting her with a nail-studded bat “is not particularly serious”, according to a Portuguese judge
In 20 years Portugal will be an island in Europe
Spanish doctors complain of discrimination
São João Hospital has 30 surgeons who have never been in the operating room
432 doctors investigated for fraud worth 943 million euros
Case of the faceless baby reported in Spain as putting “the Portuguese medical profession in check”
Important note: This article and all the others on this blog are not about the 5% of decent Portuguese who care and who deserve all my sympathy and I sincerely wish them all the best, because I know what it is to be a person of integrity in Portugal. Nevertheless, the reality in Portugal is so severe and so ingrained in all strata of society that I have no other way to denounce it than to generalize.

A country where criminals and the powerful are systematically protected to the detriment of victims and its citizens is the definition of a dictatorship, which is why Portugal should leave the EU.

443 Comments
Newest 
Min
 3 days ago
Why can’t Portugese people just pay some tax? I’m so fed up of being asked for large amounts of cash to facilitate off-record transactions. Even air bnb hosts are asking me to cancel bookings and pay in cash (with a tiny discount for me). I’m trying to buy / rent a house at the moment and I am actively avoiding Portugese landlords and sellers because I’m just so tired of dealing with them. I came back to the U.K. this week and it is so pleasant to be in a well run, flourishing country with polite people and reliable services. Even the grey weather feels pleasant after being in the hellscape that is Lisbon. One thing Portugal has done is make me appreciate my own country.

 Reply
asd
 Reply to  Min
 1 day ago
Because they’re scum. I’ve never been more disgusted with a people, collectively, than I have the Portuguese. This place is a joke, I sincerely hope the Portuguese people go extinct. No country should allow them to enter, they should be expelled from the EU. Let them wallow and rot in their misery. I fully agree with your last sentence. There isn’t a worse people on the face of the earth. This place is a fourth world, stone aged hellhole, full of latently narcissistic, conniving, cowardly, vindictive, passive aggressive, scumbags. It’s not even a 90%, it’s every single one of them in some form or fashion. Meritocracy doesn’t exist here, neither does decency. Nothing good is here. Anyone reading this while researching a move here, do not. You will fully regret it at some point. It’s not worth the NHR, it’s not worth the weather, it’s just not worth it.

Last edited 1 day ago by asd
 Reply
synnbis
 20 days ago
My apartment was burglarized. I lost over 30K in belongings. Then found out that the property disabled the alarm several months ago without telling me.

Went on tripadvisor and found out other apartments under the same property management company had been burglarized.

The police did nothing, obviously. I naively asked the property management company to install metal bars to make it impossible to force the window but they refused and told me to leave the apartment instead. I live on the ground floor. With enough time, anyone can break in.

I’d like to sue for damages and hold the landlord responsible but no one here is on my side. Even the police isn’t taking my case seriously. Instead they try to refer me to some lawyer through the official translator who asks 1500 euro to contact Camara Municipal and have window bars installed.

This is just scum. That single event is what made me decide to leave the country. I’d rather live in the cold weather and not deal with this anymore.

I feel in danger. I haven’t slept properly in months and these people don’t care. I don’t even trust the courts to be on my side.

Behind the nice smiles is just indifference. They just don’t care. People here don’t seem to care at all. They have no clue what’s inacceptable.

Last edited 20 days ago by synnbis
 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  synnbis
 20 days ago
I am very sorry for what happened to you and I sincerely hope that you get your life and happiness back, which you are fully entitled to, far away from Poortugal.

 Reply
Benedict
 21 days ago
Six months ago I sold my apartment in Lisbon and moved to Paris. Cancelled all my utilities, and was sooo relieved to finally be out of there…… only to have ED**P continue charging my bank account. And not only that – they suddenly started charging me for an apartment I lived in 3 years ago as well! After blocking them from my bank, I am now getting letters from a law firm, stating they will take me to court if I do not pay. Moving to Portugal was, unfortunately, the worst decision I have ever made. And I have lived in 7 countries so far.

 Reply
Marion
 Reply to  Benedict
 21 days ago
That’s a lesson I’ve learnt here, to never authorize utility services to debit directly from bank account. I had a bad experience with Vod*fone here, that they spent a whole year charging me with the wrong value and every single month I had to talk to them to correct my bill. They always told me they would fix it, but the whole year past and they never did. So I did not even waited for the contract to end, paid extra so I could go to another service provider. They are the worst in customer service, they are rude and obnoxious.

 Reply
Marion
 21 days ago
Another thing that really upsets me are that the commercial services are the worst I’ve ever seen. They treat their customers really bad, they overcharge the services and the quality is sh*t. It’s like that they don’t want to sell their product or that they are too rich to care, like they don’t need another customer. The best services I’ve had here were from foreigners like British, Brazilian and others. The majority of Portuguese are lazy and careless. Again, up on North they work more but still dishonest. I had friends over there that suggested me I didn’t pay my energy provider when I came to live in Lisbon district. That they did it a lot of these dishonest things. Why would I do that? I’ve used that energy so I must pay my utility bill, non? When you talk to them everyday you always hear about their little scams stories, scamming the government or others citizens. Very normalized here.

Last edited 21 days ago by Marion
 Reply
Marion
 21 days ago
This blog is amazing. I thought I only had those issues because I’m a foreigner here, but reading your comments I’ve realized people from all over the world feels that same way living here. I live in Lisbon district for 8 years now, and I must say that is the worst place in Portugal (maybe a little better than Algarve though). Have lived up in north also and the people there are much warmer and kind, but still dishonest. What amazes me (in a bad way) here in Portugal is its people culture, like they aren’t social and they lack a sense of community. Here in Portugal for example I’ve never had neighbors who interact with other neighbors and they don’t like social gatherings even in Christmas. Their families are cold distant. That’s so odd. Even the young people do not get together much. And what I see is that they aren’t social with themselves, not just because someone is foreign. We don’t see women at bars drinking and enjoying a happy hour like we see in Spain. We just see them whispering with each other near the schools, complaining about something and that’s it. Their conversations are just trivial and small talk, a lot of times they just complain. They don’t laugh much either. It’s like I don’t know, kinda of a community depression. It’s so depressing. Whenever I want to be more happy I travel to neighbor Spain and instantly my mood gets better. I feel like I live in some Eastern European country, very depressing. I thought that Portugal was similar to Spain but I was so wrong 🙁

 Reply
Oscar
 21 days ago
Just to add.. 15 years I came in a restaurant.. I made a monthly bill… never checked as I trusted them, MY FRIENDS, until one day… something caught my eye… they were adding every month 100s to my bill… I was upset and angry.. 15 years x 12 x 200 us 36000 euro… you know their response: you are stupid, it’s your fault, you make a bill!!!!

 Reply
Oscar
 21 days ago
I lived 15 years in Portugal.. I saw the beauty and had a great time… but then my health got bad.. and I had less money… all the smelly flies around me for 15 years disappeared… I was scammed with fake contracts, by people who were my “friends”… I could not sit at a table or the table would be full in 10min with people taking advantage.. they were calling each other… when I was in my knees they wanted my shoes.. when they had my shoes they wanted my socks.. they dont stop. I hate portuguese… sick, stupid people.. only looking for money money money… I also left the shithole… one example: I bought a nice TV… my landlord bought a TV table… as he wanted my TV.. now I have nothing left.. Inam half homeless but I can breath again… I had 2 heart attacks from that scum… if Ibhad 2, they had 4… assholes.

 Reply
Green
 Reply to  Oscar
 13 days ago
I completely agree with you.

 Reply
Michael Johnson
 2 months ago
I have a condition where every step for me is painful, thus I try to save the number of steps I take and try to walk into the grocery store through the closed cash registers rather thanm walking a few hundred extra feet. In Portugal I am often sent back by a mean employee who tells me to go back and enter their store through the correct entry. I started boycotting such stores where they behave like they are on a power trip.

Another story is when I drove to a petrol station and drove “in reverse” into a pump with another side of my car since their petrol hose is too short in order to fill up my car and the other side of the petrol (gasoline) pump had a huge truck staying there for a long time and I was in a hurry. I wanted to fill up €100 worth of petrol. The petrol station attendee (cashier) told me to go back to my car and wait behind the huge multi axis truck and only then when the truck leaves to fill my car up. I was in a hurry, so I tried to reason with the Portuguese lady, but she did not budge an inch. She demanded that I go back, drive around the pump and now there were more cars in line, then wait a long time and only then fill up. I was first in line, now I would have became a 5th in line and late for my appointment. I quit, I left and I did not fill up there, and I will boycott that particular petrol station for good. This is common mentality in Portugal, to go on a power trip, pushing RULES to people, with mean attitude, sometimes acting really creepy, taking your credit card and refusing to give it back to you (yes, Portuguese do that often!!!), while they are extremely corrupt, dishonest and are often thieving in many cases.

Remark: There are some really nice, friendly and helpful people in Portugal; unfortunately the rest of them are nothing like that and are increasingly hostile to the foreigners/tourists.

As it seems, a nation of depressed losers, with some really nice ones in between.

 Reply
Mo Swatek
 2 months ago
Any country is better than the US, nowhere is more racism,more stupidity and hatred the in the US. The food is mostly processed crap, full of fake flavours and cheese and bacon on nearly everything, yuck. Portugal has so much to offer but it’s not available for entitled demanding Expats.

 Reply
asd
 Reply to  Mo Swatek
 2 months ago
How Portuguese of you…. latent narcissism exists in all you toxic pieces of garbage…. Portuguese are the most detestable people I’ve encountered in all my years. You’re all pathetic.

 Reply
Green
 Reply to  asd
 2 months ago
100% Agree 👍

 Reply
Lucky
 3 months ago
In my experience, It doesn’t matter whether you live in Poortugal or not, please always be aware of Portuguese people.

 Reply
Michael Johnson
 Reply to  Lucky
 2 months ago
And their food is horrible, truly horrible. Yuck.

 Reply
Jose Nicolau
 4 months ago
The CEO of CLOUDFLARE said: “PORTUGAL IS NOT A SERIOUS COUNTRY!!! Think twice before going to Portugal”. I say it’s not even worth thinking about!!!!!!!

— Original Portuguese text —

O CEO da CLOUDFLARE disse: “PORTUGAL NÃO É UM PAÍS SÉRIO!! Pensem duas vezes antes de ir para Portugal”. Eu digo que nem vale a pena pensar!!!!!!!
https://www.jornaldenegocios.pt/empresas/detalhe/ceo-da-cloudflare-explode-contra-portugal-no-x-se-pensam-em-investir-aqui-pensem-duas-vezes

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Jose Nicolau
 4 months ago
Thank you so much for this news. It goes without saying how serious the words and the warning are from someone with the status of CEO of one of the most influential and ubiquitous technology companies in the world today. I’ll post an article about this later.
In short, as you say, “It’s not even worth thinking about!” Just don’t come! Everyone with a conscience wants to flee Poortugal as soon as possible, but no informed person wants to come to Poortugal. Fortunately, the world is waking up to the nightmare and the Portuguese fraud! Your life and happiness come first my friends, so stay far away from Poortugal!

 Reply
Lucky
 Reply to  Blog Author
 3 months ago
👍👍

 Reply
Não é João
 4 months ago
Finally, someone said it!! You either search for people with the same experiences or you go crazy thinking that of course it’s you! Because if it’s always the others then it must be you, right? Not in Portugal! Thank you dearly for your honest words

Last edited 4 months ago by Não é João
 Reply
Naish
 4 months ago
I am delighted to announce that I finally managed to get out from this ***hole country. I wish I knew about this blog and reality about Poortugal. I thank the author of the blog who helped us to take an action and leave for good. It only cost me 30k euros, it could be much worse..

 Reply
Reva
 Reply to  Naish
 4 months ago
Congratulations 👏🏽 Good luck in your new life

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Naish
 4 months ago
I am so happy to have helped you! You made my day. I created this blog to help save lives. I gave everything I could, and I will continue to do so. Unfortunately, I’m out of time for now, but as soon as I can, I will return to publish many more articles about the real, diabolical Portugal. I want the world to know the truth about the daily horrors that take place there. I am so sorry about the money you’ve “left” in Poortugal, all the suffering you’ve been subjected to and the precious years the Portuguese have stolen from you. It’s not fair, but really, the only way to avoid it is to never set foot in Poortugal or escape as soon as possible. Portugal is the death of everything!

I wish you and your loved ones a very happy life in which you can enjoy every day to the fullest and fulfill all your dreams in a normal, healthy environment. What I regret the most is having witnessed my family’s daily suffering and watching the years being stolen from them by the Portuguese, (years that will never come back), without having been able to help them, because I myself was also in enormous pain and totally confused about what was happening to us. At the time, I didn’t know, nor could I have known, that I was living in hell on earth, surrounded by monsters, creatures of darkness, not human beings. Hopefully, that won’t happen to anyone else if I can help it through this blog.

 Reply
Revs
 4 months ago
So I find myself here again after eating so many depressing, disappointing dinners here in Portugal. With a few exceptions the food here is disgusting!! A waiter reccomended a dish this weekend, in the countryside, which was bland strips of unseasoned pork, sprinkled with cheap pickled vegetables then covered with crisps. I almost cried. The people here have no idea how awful it is!! I know this isn’t quite on topic for this post, sorry. Please could you open a section of the blog for the horrors of Portugese food? I’d never tasted moudly fish or seafood until I came here!

 Reply
Janet
 Reply to  Revs
 4 months ago
Oh my goodness, yes! Tough, gristly meat, bland cheese, pastries that all taste alike, fries with everything. No vegetables. The wine is cheap-about the only positive aspect of food and drink.

 Reply
Michael Johnson
 Reply to  Janet
 2 months ago
Most of the cheap Poortuguese wine is HORRIBLE!!! You can’t drink that piss…

 Reply
Jimbo
 5 months ago
So, I have just had a weird and rather disturbing experience with a Portuguese doctor who literally growled at me for trying to re-confirm my (correct) understanding of their rushed after-care instructions, and told me to read the sheet myself. This was following persistent rudeness, condescension, and impatience throughout our few consultations. It is, I think, absolutely shocking unprofessionalism (sadly not my first experience of such in the last few months; the other was an electrician who shrugged his shoulders at my suggestion that he review the electrical safety of my house, saying it was ‘hard to know what to fix until something goes wrong’ – categorically untrue as I can immediately point out several problems with the installation myself, as a layperson).

 Reply
Jimbo
 5 months ago
It’s a small sample, but…

“Results: The prevalence of primary psychopathy was 39.6% and of secondary psychopathy was 49.8%”

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/332626692_Prevalence_of_psychopathic_traits_in_a_sample_of_the_Portuguese_population

 Reply
Chillypepper
 Reply to  Jimbo
 4 months ago
After a certain period of time. I adapted, i felt more socially intelligent, cold, Strange Eyes, i wanted to hurt people, outsmart them, and it’s because i was surrounded by predators…. My brain picked up the vibes and i found myself in total survival mode, people and all their psyco games, passive agressiveness, very dark traits, it’s just a sick and toxic society, they want to see you in the shit! To them it’s all fun and games, and they have a laugh, i lost my trust and found out there is something really wrong about portugal and it’s people….

 Reply
Does it matter?
 Reply to  Jimbo
 5 months ago
While I’m not defending Portugal, that study had a sample of only 255 participants, which is very small, with twice as many females as males. Also, it used an internet survey to assess psychopathy, which is inadequate. It’s not a good study.

Also, just from experience with dealing with the Portuguese and just knowing about them in a general sense, they don’t strike me as particularly impulsive, which is one psychopathic trait among many. So, very likely, we can eliminate impulsivity.

Last edited 5 months ago by Does it matter?
 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Jimbo
 5 months ago
The fact that the sample has considerably more women than men is significant, because psychopathy is more prevalent in men (supposedly, a 6:1 ratio!). It’s also self-reported, if it was a serious evaluation with behavioral analysis from interviews with family, coworkers, law enforcement, etc., I’m convinced it would be much, much higher.

I think it’s a good step though, I’ve always thought antisocial personality disorders must be common in Portugal, but people are rarely diagnosed, unless they commit a serious crime or become a nuisance to health professionals, police, etc. Speaking with emergency workers, they seem to corroborate that they see a lot of people with psychopathic traits while on the job.

 Reply
Jimbo
 Reply to  Anonymous
 5 months ago
To be honest I thought the self-reporting was an issue, because I doubt a real psychopath would admit it upfront without some good incentive. But, thought it worth adding to the discussion.

 Reply
italiano
 7 months ago
Totally agree Mortugal is a total scum. People eaten up by heroin at every corner but the (fake) police will only go after car drivers. Fuck you mortugal!

 Reply
Michael Johnson
 Reply to  italiano
 2 months ago
As many police I had to deal with in Portugal they all were very friendly and helpful. Even I had some bad experiences in Portugal with their businesses and people in general, their police seems like an exception.

 Reply
Christophe
 7 months ago
On a Facebook group, someone recently commented that Portugal is NOT a third world country, saying this is completely unfair to third world countries, they said instead: “Portugal is still in the Stone Age”

I agree with the first part, however comparing the mentality of the Portuguese to the Stone Age era, is also not fair to the Stone Age, which is divided into 3 distinct periods: the most primitive being the Paleolithic, followed by the Mesolithic and the final stage known as the Neolithic

It would be more accurate to say that the mentality (not the standard of living) of the Portuguese people is trapped in the earliest most primitive stages of the Lower Paleolithic Stone Age era, and the most optimistic thing you could say is that maybe Portuguese mentality is “developing” towards the Middle Paleolithic era, and with luck, it might get there in 2 or 3 million years

Except that’s not even true, it’s WAY too optimistic…..

Yes, the mentality (not the standard of living, we’re not measuring that here) of the Portuguese is trapped in the most primitive stages of the Lower Paleothic Stone Age era, that part is true, however Portuguese mentality clearly is NOT “developing” towards a Middle Paleolithic Stone Age mentality…. That part is false, it’s too optimistic…. The mentality of the Portuguese is NOT developing towards anything positive

Portuguese mentality reached its highest point in the Lower Paleolithic Stone Age mentality, and now it’s regressing and going back to something so primitive and sub-human that it’s difficult to even imagine what it might be

And so 2 questions remain: (1) how much longer will the European Union be able to keep sending billions of euros to Portugal?… in order to pretend like Portugal is some kind of European country, when it clearly is not.

And (2) how much longer before the extremely primitive mentality of the Portuguese people becomes so obvious to the rest of the entire world, that EVERY non-Portuguese person in the world will go out of their way avoid the Portuguese?

 Reply
NNeimz
 5 months ago
All you gota do is look at their main sport! FuteboL! Full of korruption, liars and kon artists at the top, and running the big 3 teams and Leagues overall. And most of the fans support this fiasko and egg it on, as long as their team is winning, they don’t mention that it was thru korruption, and only the rivals are the bad ones lol.

Last edited 8 months ago by NNeimz
 Reply
Matthew
 8 months ago
I also live in Newark, NJ, and I agree 100 percent with the last comment by Amelia, regarding the Portuguese in Newark.

I found this site by searching “Portuguese are scum”

One day last summer, I was on the train going from Newark Broad St to New York Penn Station, and I found myself with one of these creatures sitting directly across from me…. a fat, square-headed Portuguese man had plumped himself down, even though there were plenty of free seats available

How do I know he was Portuguese? Because I once made the mistake of going into a Portuguese bakery in the Ironbound district, and this creature was working there, and when I placed my order in English, instead of speaking Portuguese, he stared at me with undisguised hostility, if not horror. And so I walked out, and I never go into Ironbound anymore (the Portuguese neighborhood in Newark) unless I have to go there for my work, because there’s been another car wreck, and so I have to go in there and tow it away

And so now here he is in my own city, sitting right in front of me. His face was flush and blotched with red, and his eyes were very close set and slightly squint

Puffing noisily, he dug his unshapely tongue, still caked with bits of food, around his half-open mouth. There he sat, legs apart, his stomach and gut stuffed horribly into summer shorts.

I could not say whether the physical and mental deformity of my Portuguese fellow-passenger was the result of long psychiatric confinement, some innate debility or simply beer-drinking and eating too much cake and pastries at his bakery, in between meals

To my considerable relief, the monster got out at Secaucus Junction, leaving no one in front of me until the next stop on my ride into Penn Station

My understanding (from reading this blog) is that Americans (as well as French, Swiss, and other foreigners) are not welcomed in Portugal, and I’m not surprised at all….I have no intention of ever going to Portugal anyway, but that’s not good enough: I also I want these creatures the hell out of my own country. I want them to back to Portugal where they belong!

 Reply
Amelia
 8 months ago
I live in Newark, New Jersey and I’ve never even been to Portugal, and never plan to go there, because I already know what these creatures are like: Newark has over 30,000 Portuguese!

Fortunately Newark has a population of over 300,000, so only one out of ten are Portuguese, but that’s still way too many

I work as the receptionist at a car repair company and see a lot of Portuguese, because they’re always getting involved in car wrecks, but according to them it’s never their fault. Of course not, it’s always the fault of the other driver

As I mentioned living in a city where only one person out of ten is Portuguese is already a catastrophe

The good news is the Portuguese in Newark keep to themselves and stay mostly in one neighborhood (called Ironbound) and they’re not spread out over the entire city, so if you’re in Newark, all you have to do is avoid the Ironbound neighborhood, and you can pretty much avoid them…. unless your job involves having contact with these creatures, like mine does, and so some days, there’s no way of escaping.

But not every day is like that, and I can always escape them after work.

I can’t even imagine what it must be like to live in the country of Portugal and be surrounded by these horrible creatures everywhere, day in and day out, and there’s no way to escape them.

It must be like living in hell on earth

 Reply
Silvio Marcello
 8 months ago
This is the latest new low. Portuguese politician caught stealing luggage at the airport: https://www.jn.pt/5053298241/deputado-do-chega-suspeito-de-furtar-malas-em-voos-para-o-parlamento/

 Reply
Patricia Gomes
 Reply to  Silvio Marcello
 8 months ago
It’s unbelievable, the politician sold the clothes and shoes at Vinted, for 1,50€ each…how low a person can be? Throw away a career and trust for robbed pennies. I know that Açores has a very low cost of life but wow, this is another level really….just wild.

 Reply
Camille Hardouin
 8 months ago
So here’s my story of France versus Portugal…

I work online (as a translator) and I was living in Lille, France, but I wasn’t earning enough money to finish the month, and I was talking about this with someone who had spent 3 months in Portugal….

Long story short, they convinced me Portugal was a lot less expensive than France and I should give it a try

And so I did, but after only six months in Portugal I got scammed a number of times, something that had never happened to me in France, in my entire life

I was already thinking about leaving, and then I saw this video “Lille Je t’aime” (I love you Lille) by a young French woman who regretted having to leave her hometown of Lille and she hoped to return as soon as possible

Watching this video convinced that I had made a mistake and there was nothing in Portugal that could even begin to compare to the beauty of Lille, or the people who live there, and so I decided then and there to move back home, I knew I was better off in France with almost no money, than I would ever be living in Portugal, surrounded by crooks, con artists, and scammers

So I left Portugal, I’m back in France now, I will never return to Portugal, and leaving there was the best decision I ever made in my life

Now I’m encouraging everyone I meet to avoid Portugal. And some of them are listening to me

Best wishes to everyone reading this blog…. my advice is to get out of Portugal if you can and if you’re not in Portugal, don’t even think about going there. Avoid it like the plague!

Here’s the video that inspired me to leave Portugal. I’m sorry it’s only in French but it’s almost like an inspiring music video, so you can get the idea of Lille (compared to Portugal) even if you don’t understand a single word of French

https://www.lesfeesdufle.com/video-lille-je-taime.html

(Note: To watch the video above, you have to scroll down below the picture of the young woman who made it (sitting on the stairs) and click on the left side above where it says “Video Originale” The video to the right has sub-titles, but they’re only in French and the music on that one also seems distorted)

 Reply
Leonardo
 Reply to  Camille Hardouin
 3 months ago
As a Portuguese born and raised in that shit hole, I’m just happy I got to get out 10 years ago, unfortunately I come from the most inbred part of the country filled with racists, crooks and mediocre people who are absolutely jealous of anyone, even someone like me that was raised incredibly poor, too bad I couldn’t leave earlier, maybe I would have no ties with that hellhole anymore.

I was very lucky to be able to move to France and over there I immediately cut almost all ties I had with those parasites. The day my mother dies, I will not be coming back and I do my best to pay for her trips so that I don’t have to go at all and she just visits.

Yes, Portugal is cheap but at what cost? Until a few years ago I was still constantly checking for my wallet to check if someone stole it, that’s the education we have, the whole world is your enemy and you need to be a predator, it’s a terrible state of mind to be in and I hope I can fully cut my ties with that place.

France is a fantastic country, I don’t live there anymore but I’m forever thankful to it as it changed my life.
I’m happy you found your place, good luck with your future, if you want to visit a cheap and nice place, go to southeast Asia, at least people are honest, kind and the prices are actually cheap since people aren’t constantly trying to scam you like the Portuguese rats.

 Reply
Christophe
 Reply to  Camille Hardouin
 8 months ago
Bravo! And I couldn’t have said it any better….

Congratulations on getting the hell out of that land of monsters and retards!

And let’s keep warning others to never set foot in Portugal

Lille is a very civilized and beautiful city, you’ll be much happier there than you would ever be in Portugal

 Reply
anonymous
 8 months ago
And only God / Omnipotent indeed / Knew that the Portuguese were mammals / Of a different breed.

– anonymous

 Reply
Tom
 9 months ago
Portuguese LIVRO DE RECLAMAÇÕES website is deeply technically corrupt and is clearly discriminating based on your name, account and your situation! I have tested it for years and I can state that they will block you from submitting inquiries and complaints if they want to. The way they do it: upon submission of the complaint or inquiry online (say about the delayed or lost mail piece or a parcel sent via CTT) the SEND/SUBMIT button is being “rolled” (“wait” feature) indefinitely. It’s been lie this for many years and they never fixed it. How can one submit a complaint on the Complaints Book if it does not work? How is this even legal to deny a Portuguese citizen or a resident their right to have their lost mail to be investigated or to submit any kind of consumer complaints? Whom to complain to about this issue?

 Reply
Reva
 9 months ago
I will probably get a lot of hate for this post but do you (or anyone reading this) think it’s possible to live here as an expat on a good foreign income and not be corrupted by the society? My husband wanted to move here for the tax break. He has a finance company and I work remotely as professional in the U.K. We feel quite rich here and live in the “expat bubble” (which is pretty grim as a social group but that is not the point of this post). Despite being so insulated we have already been scammed out of 000s by an awful expat woman who had been living here for 30 years. Everything you say in the blog applies to her even though she is German. I am worried that living here will slowly turn me into someone like that and that it’s impossible to live somewhere like this without risk. I have also lost a perfectly healthy tooth to a dentist who then tried to trick me into a very expensive implant – she was also an expat who had been here for decades. I grew up in the U.K. –
I had never been scammed in 30+ years and here it has happened twice in one year in Lisbon.
My experience outside of Lisbon has been much better but obviously I was a visitor. I don’t drive so I take the bus out of the city whenever I can and have enjoyed the genuinely kind and beautiful rural communities in the remote parts of this country. Generally, though, I am afraid for my future. I am worried that my husband is so dazzled by the lack of tax that I will have to stay here for decades. I want to protect myself from the mentality, depression and the scamming. I have seen a kind, expat friend of mine be destroyed by this country in under a year (he started a business here and is now leaving without his life savings).
But, if money isn’t a really concern, does anyone think it’s possible to live here and be ok?
Thank you for this blog, it is really helping people and I can see that there are posts with issues infinitely worse than mine.

Last edited 9 months ago by Reva
 Reply
Patricia Gomes
 Reply to  Reva
 8 months ago
Hello Reva, I’ve read your comment and it remembered me that once I had the same doubt and questions that you have (about 3 years ago). I agree with the Blog’s Author that if one is a good and honest person, this country can’t change that, but specially if one is like that will not be able to endure this crazy society. Because it bothers too much to the point of a person become paranoid thinking that everyone is trying to scam or lying. A person to be happy here must be a person who doesn’t worry about the lack of justice, healthcare, social living, poor constructions (even with toxic material as lead), who don’t worry about a government that hides and lies everything, even the newspapers aren’t real newspaper, it’s absurd. A person needs to be totally ok with all that to be happy here. I really don’t imagine anyone to be happy here unless a person that had an awful poor life like many that come from Africa and Brazil. These are the ones that can endure most of it because they are more used to the same related things in their country. I’m from Brazil but I must say that even my country, a third world country, if you study and work hard you can have a good life regarding private healthcare, judicial system, social living, freedom of press and opinions, constructions,all are much more developed there. Unfortunately as all third world countries has extreme inequalities, and a high number of people are very very poor, just living with low wages and public healthcare. Those are the ones that find Portugal a better place to live. But for the rest of the people, in my opinion should run away from here. I do hope me and my family will be able to move somewhere else next year. Take care and wish you and your family well.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Reva
 9 months ago
The fact is that Portugal is a paradise for crooks, because the judicial system itself is run by crooks and people who are abysmally incompetent and who don’t give a damn about the suffering and injustices of others, which is equally criminal (in fact, practically the whole of Portuguese society is made up of very selfish or simple-minded people, without any hint of genuine solidarity for their fellow man, regardless of the first superficial facade of sympathy). Therefore, all these countless crooks who move around freely in Portugal know perfectly well that they have carte blanche to steal, swindle, etc., since 99.9% of the time absolutely nothing will happen to them, factually or in practical terms, and when a victim tries to defend himself, as in any normal country, using the pillars of the law, lawyers and the courts, 99.9% of the time he or she will be robbed again and again, often during a degrading ordeal of more than 10 years. A real nightmare and an attack on dignity and human rights, but since Portugal is a sovereignty, they can do whatever they want with you, no matter what your nationality, because no international authority can intervene to help you, hence the enormous danger of living in Portugal, as you are 100% in the hands of the Portuguese for serious matters. Because of this, Portugal is becoming a magnet for criminals of other nationalities, including some from democratic and developed countries, as, let’s put it this way, they feel at home there, as they can do anything they wouldn’t be able to do in their home countries, without suffering very serious criminal consequences.
I apologize for the long introduction, but I think it was necessary to explain the situation well, because we’re talking about people’s lives. Now, to answer your question directly, from my point of view, a decent and good person does not become a bad person, but that doesn’t mean that the environment of enormous lack of humanity in Portugal does not affect us in a very negative way, as it affected me and my family to the point of almost destroying our relationship. Fortunately, it is over now and we are much stronger and inseparable, and another thing that gives me a lot of encouragement is that I have made this blog denouncing Portugal and I know every night when I go to bed that I have eventually helped more people and saved lives with my words and yours. Portuguese society is completely erratic, there is no rule of law and danger really does lurk around every corner, to run risks in Portugal, all you have to do is live a normal life, so be very careful with your money and don’t need anything from Portugal. Still, frankly, the best thing to do is to leave Portugal, I’m speaking from the heart.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Blog Author
 7 months ago
Can’t agree more. When you’re falsely accused, false witnesses and getting an unfair trial in a biased not impartial court. You can beg for help at your embassy, at the EU Commission, everywhere. But they all tell you the same: they are not allowed to intervene in an independent ( member) state. You’re outlawed. You’re alone….

 Reply
Reva
 Reply to  Blog Author
 9 months ago
Thank you for replying, I appreciate it and your work with the blog

 Reply
Bill James
 9 months ago
POORtugal is only good for one thing: the climate. If not warm climate I would never set my foot on this scammer, fraud and thief den.

 Reply
Leonardo
 Reply to  Bill James
 3 months ago
What’s so good about the climate? It looks like a disaster honestly and it’s far too hot most of the summer to even be able to do anything without AC, what’s so good about it? If I compare it to for example Nice, it’s inferior in almost every possible way.

 Reply
Bill James
 9 months ago
Almost everyone in Poortugal are involved in stealing mail and theft in general (occasional exceptions apply). Bank managers, post office workers, cashiers, workers, politicians, everyone’s at it. It’s terrible! And no one’s doing anything to resolve the situation and to punish the thieves since almost everyone is a (potential) thief.

 Reply
Christophe
 9 months ago
The comment below was found one of the few Facebook groups that even allows criticism of Portugal, without getting censored or banned. It’s about AIMA (formerly SEF) and how it’s impossible even to get an appointment with AIMA, to renew a Portugal residency card

And at the end, speaking as a French citizen who already lived in Portugal, and then decided to leave, and to never return, I have my own comment / solution to offer anyone who is thinking about living in Portugal

First, here’s the Facebook comment I found:

“Its the initial appointment for residency, and the first renewal. Most immigrants (80% according to the government) don’t make it to 5 years in Portugal, so most don’t apply for permanent residency, they leave.
People can’t get appointments at AIMA (to renew their residency cards) because they simply don’t exist – AIMA literally closed them all down. It’s not that they are all booked up, its that they have none at all.
The only way a lawyer can help to (legally) get a renewal appointment is for you to literally SUE AIMA. It costs between €1500-€6k, depending on the lawyer, just to lodge the suit. And the courts were getting so many (hundreds a day), that they suspended them, then slowed the system. So now some people are still suing, yet still waiting for appointments and paying their lawyers more and more while waiting.
There were people who were paying lawyers to get appointments successfully for them last year and earlier this year, but those lawyers were doing this illegally, by booking out a bunch of appointments in the online system with fake details and charging people to get them. Many lawyers were caught hiring teams of people to do this, and AIMA closed down the online appointment booking system for this reason – it hasnt opened since.
AIMA has only just started contacting people in the past couple of weeks to make appointments with them directly. But its only a handful of people so far. Theres a backlog of hundreds of thousands (400,000 just in ONE visa category), and this has been going on for ten years.”

end of Facebook comment

And here’s my reaction to the comment above and my solution to the problem being discussed…. The ONLY solution is don’t even think about trying to renew a Portuguese residency card. Leave Portugal as soon as possible, and never return! Also, try to warn others to never go there in the first place. It’s a broken, dysfunctional, third world country (although Portugal is actually a lot worse than any African country I’ve visited, so you have to call it a “fourth world shit-hole” and NOT a third world country because this is not fair to third world countries, where many of the people are smiling, warm and friendly, unlike the Portuguese) ….the Portuguese people are vicious, small-minded and mean-spirited and the only thing they’re interested in is ripping off foreigners for every euro they can steal from you

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Christophe
 9 months ago
Thank you Christophe for your very important comment and contribution. 💯! May I take this opportunity to wish all my readers a New Year 2025 full of happiness, love and humanity, the exact opposite of what we find in Portugal. And may everyone finally be free of Portugal. True life begins only after leaving that den of death that takes absolutely everything from us!

 Reply
Paula Müller
 9 months ago
P💩💩RTUGAL, I’m out of this damn hole!!

 Reply
Miguel Santiago
 10 months ago
I’m Portuguese, I’m 25 years old and I sent Poortugal to fu*k, I live in Dresden in Germany (you’re good, hardworking and ambitious, so Germany gives you everything)!!! POORTUGAL has nothing but thieves, crooks and corrupt people, and a lot of injustice joining the party, and a zombie people, the Portuguese people are perfect for living in dictatorships!!! In 2022 I finished my degree in International Relations, with a miserable salary, my future was doomed. Me and 3 other colleagues from the University are now all living and working in Germany and the company where we work pays for our German course, we pay our bills, we manage to save money and travel around Europe which is all connected by TGV lines and trains and in 2 hours you are in any capital in Europe, Portugal is isolated from all of Europe, I believe it’s even on purpose to keep the people stupid, all of Portugal is incredibly mediocre!!! By the way, my father, the owner of a construction company, was robbed by two crooked partners, the company was embezzled, my father never saw the money again and closed the company and now lives on a shitty pension. Justice??? There is no justice in Poortugal, if you have money Poortugal is the most dangerous place to live. I will never go back to that place! I like your blog 👏 when I read the comments here on the blog, from Portuguese (Portuguese scum), this blog makes perfect sense!!!!!!!!

— Original text in Portuguese —

Sou português tenho 25 anos e mandei Poortugal pro car*lho, vivo em Dresden na Alemanha (tu és bom, trabalhador e ambicioso, então a Alemanha dá-te Tudo)!!! POORTUGAL só tem ladrões, vigaristas e corruptos e a juntar à festa muita injustiça e um povo zombie, o povo português é perfeito para viver em ditaduras!! Em 2022 terminei meu curso de Relações Internacionais, salário miserável, meu futuro estava condenado. Eu e mais 3 colegas da Universidade estamos então todos a viver e a trabalhar na Alemanha e a empresa onde estamos a trabalhar paga-nos o curso de Alemão, pagamos as nossas contas, conseguimos poupar dinheiro e viajar pela Europa que está toda ligada por linhas de Tgv e comboios e em 2 horas estás em qualquer capital da Europa , Portugal está isolado de toda a Europa, acredito que até seja de propósito que manter o povo estúpido, todo Portugal é incrivelmente medíocre!!! A propósito, meu pai dono de uma empresa de construção civil, foi roubado por dois socios vigaristas, um desfalque na empresa, meu pai nunca mais viu o dinheiro e fechou a empresa e vive agora com uma reforma de merda. Justiça??? Em Poortugal não existe, se tens dinheiro Poortugal é o lugar mais perigoso para viveres. Nunca mais voltarei para aquele lugar! Gosto do teu Blog 👏 quando leio os comentários aqui no blog de portugueses (escumalha portuguesa), faz todo o sentido este blog!!!!!!!!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Miguel Santiago
 10 months ago
Hi Miguel,

I’m very happy for you. You are in good hands in Germany now. Poortugal is disgusting and fortunately dying in a terminal and agonizing state…
Poortugal is a society made up almost entirely of unpunished criminals and equally criminally minded conniving people who live only to steal, destroy and cause immense unhappiness and suffering to others. Fortunately, the good people are all escaping, or trying to escape the Portuguese hell. Never allow anyone to steal your happiness! Poortugal is so bad that it would need outside military intervention to put everyone in jail.

 Reply
João M. Alvarenga
 10 months ago
I left Portugal, I was 48 years old, today I’m 67. It’s never too late… I’ve lived in Germany since then, Portugal is a destroyer of lives!!! I was wronged by the Portuguese courts, you are fucked in Portugal when your life depends on the decision of a son of a bitch, corrupt and full of inferiority complexes, they are always on the side of the infinite swindlers and thieves of Poortugal, that is how the Portuguese judges are. .. Living in Poortugal is living in darkness, with people with a cave mentality… POORTUGAL is a pathetic place, yes I can’t say that that place is a country. I like this blog 👏👏👏

 Reply
I will Fuck your mother
 10 months ago
Show up your face clown. You can cry out, it’s free. And those people who you cry for , they wont certainly come back.

What a bunch of useless suckers yall British are. You write so much like a journalist but you don’t even mention your name. Come on , don’t be afraid to hide the fragility of your eggs.

I will keep coming here to fuck you all and make sure you get beaten every single time you step in Portugal.

England is a sold land btw. Blacks and Indians are fuckin your British obese women in both holes daily and you’re more interested in save other countries social problems.

Y’all so fuckin useless and ugly.

 Reply
Jimbo
 Reply to  I will Fuck your mother
 5 months ago
This… is the sound of a mask dropping.

 Reply
Tenha calma
 Reply to  I will Fuck your mother
 10 months ago
It’s not worth staying like this because it doesn’t solve anything. Have you noticed that Portugal has also been sold to immigrants? And do you think that some Portuguese women aren’t with men of another race? Are you blind or do you live in a hole?

— Original text in Portuguese —

Nao vale apena ficares assim porque nao resolve nada. Ja notaste que Portugal também foi vendida pros imigrantes? E achas que algumas mulheres portuguesas nao estao com homens de outra raça? Estas sego ou vives num buraco

 Reply
Sabryna Tenorio
 Reply to  I will Fuck your mother
 10 months ago
How ugly to disrespect women from another nation.

 Reply
Pedro
 Reply to  I will Fuck your mother
 10 months ago
I’m sorry for you. at the same time, I can’t accept more from people like you. Always the truth is painful. Educate yourself to accept the reality.

Last edited 10 months ago by Pedro
 Reply
Patricia Gomes
 11 months ago
First of all I would like to congratulate the author of this blog, because all the information here is very true to reality. Sorry if my english is not very good like yours, but I would like to comment here my experience as a Brazilian immigrant for 6 years (struggling!). When my husband saw one mention to this blog on X (twitter) and we began to read all the amazingly written articles, I’ve almost cried because I was thinking that I was paranoid or getting mentally ill for disliking here so much for the same reasons you explained here. We are both IT engineers, very experienced in our fields, and when our second daughter was born in Brazil (6 years ago) we decided to leave there for a developed country, less violent and give a more slow paced life for our daughters.

We thought at first that Portugal was kind of developed, not at first sight though, with all the neglected and abandoned buildings. We have a good friend that is Italian and he advised us to not go to Portugal. But when we were here at vacations, we thought it could be a nice place to slow down, but oh how we were soo wrong! We slowly realized that portuguese are more crooks than brazilians, as I’ve never experienced any of the bad things that happens here everyday.

First, my husband and I have a bachelor’s degree in IT and had worked in our fields since we had 19 years old, we have now 40, so we are very experienced professionals. My husband had to listen in interviews that he was much experienced and they could not afford him? (What?) The IT systems here are a total joke, it’s like Brazil in 1980’s, it’s the most terrible we ever saw, so under developed, that is hard to believe this country is part of EU. My husband was offered salaries that goes to 900 to 1400 euros. What? Then we started to realize that everything in this country is like a mob or mafia, like everything is a scam. So the IT field also is a big scam, like all the other professions here. The outsorcing companies that hire the IT professionals, pays nothing to the professionals but receives a lot of money from the companies that they outsource the employers.

We started to realize how the comunism works here, it’s like all the citizens are modern slaves to the crooks and their peers that controls the country. We live in Sintra, an area outside Lisbon, because the crooks are raising the renting prices like skyrockets, like the salary here is a joke for qualified professionals. But the scam is that new constructions are dead because the government does not allow for new buildings, so we immigrants and passive portuguese people are like hostages to them, so we have to pay the insane prices that they charge, and also comply with their illegalities of not even register the rental in Autoridade Finanças.

Because we don’t have options here, where would we go? Most apartments are closed and no new constructions so they can do whatever they want with the “hostages”, us. We started to realized how mistaken we were about here, and that this place is a madhouse. And we came from a third world country! And even there (Brazil), the law applies, we had great salaries, we had options for renting, we had great private healtcare, we had a great life, apart from the violence that causes anxiety. I imagine the people that comes here from UK, Germany, Netherlands and other developed countries, must be a shock!

The private healthcare here is outrageous, is a complete joke! Again we realized that was another scam, another mob, the healthcare mafia. We pay large amounts of money for cr*p doctors and nurses and cr*p hospitals, it is so bad that is giving me anxiety of falling ill and die of ommission of healthcare. I’ve never experienced that in Brazil, and would not imagine that in a place that calls itself a developed country. And I’m not even talking about public healthcare, that is a tragedy. But worse than the public is that the private are expensive (more than the others EU contries) and the quality is worse than Africa (maybe?).

We had great news from our bloodsucker (the tender nickname for our “senhorio”) that we were paying too low 900euros for month (to listen my neighbors pee and burp everyday, or my “polite” neighbor who washes her clothes at 2am in the morning, a place full of dog crap in the sidewalks, ugly graffitis and trash everywhere, all this for “just” 900euros) and he decided to raise more 150euros, like him said – “It’s just 150 euros, it’s nothing!” – In my country there’s an index number that guides the raising of rentals and real state contracts, it’s called IGP-M, but here in Portugal everything is arbitrary, like I’ve never seen this in my life! My god, now we’re hostages here (that’s what I call the people who get stucked here against their own will), because my husband’s residence permit renewal is delayed, as it’s totally a mess here, since they changed SEF to worst AIMA. It’s a complete nightmare. They don’t say anything to immigrants, they don’t give information, just says that is delayed but is valid (what the hell?).

So in the meantime we have to wait for these portuguese people to decide to work (because they don’t like to work, they avoid work like a plague, and they hate to study and be great professionals, they prefer to stay always average) and renewal his permit, so we can leave to a normal place before we’ll go insane. This is a place for passive and comunist people who hate to work and are dead inside, they don’t have ambition for nothing, or any business. What they like is living life at a minimum just not working and living at victim costs, the immigrants who come here because they do a lot of “propaganda” and they get money from us. I have this constant feeling that I’m living in Moldova, Russia or Cuba, it’s terrible! I am really greatful for this blog, for showing that we are not crazy and this country is f*cked up completely. Thank you for letting me to unburden here. Wish you and your family well. Best regards, Patricia.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Patricia Gomes
 11 months ago
Dear Patrícia,

Thank you for your words of support and I am very, very happy that my blog has helped you in some way, which is exactly what it is here for, to be counter-information to the massive vicious propaganda of the Portuguese, which is deceiving and then decimating the lives of many good people, but I think less and less because the truth is already getting out and foreigners are probably already avoiding and fleeing Portugal like the plague. I can’t even consider this my blog anymore, but rather all of you.

I would also like to thank you very much for your very valuable testimony full of terrible and frightening but very useful information (real gems) that will surely help many people to realize what is really happening to them in Portugal and that they are not the only ones, and it is very, very important to say this, it is not their fault at all, but the deeply toxic, malignant and very dangerous environment that is present and pervades practically the whole of Portuguese society. Actually, in Portugal everything becomes a scheme, Portugal is a country of schemes and corporative interests, where almost nothing is done or decided for the common good, but almost always for the interest of “a chosen few”. Good, highly paid jobs are also reserved for the “privileged” of the corrupt system (who don’t even have to be competent). Basically, in Portugal almost everyone/everything wants to steal from us, extort us or exploit us if they get the opportunity, and they do so in one way or another and in the most varied situations. In fact, the very basic institutions of Portuguese “democracy” are a complete sham (and a fraud). Portugal is so bad, so rotten, so corrupt that because of that, it actually functions like a dictatorship. What I want most is for the world to know that. Portugal is hell on earth, humanly speaking. Run away or don’t come and be happy somewhere else my friends!

Your English is very good, but even if it wasn’t, there wouldn’t be any problem, what is needed is for people to speak when they want to, and this blog is at your disposal. My words and your words can save many lives. Thank you.

If I may, I can understand the situation you are in, I have felt the same way, Portugal really does hold people hostage, we can’t go forward and we can’t go back. The only thing I can tell you from my own experience is not to let Portugal steal and destroy your relationship and the love you have for each other and that is what will console and save you from the Portuguese Inferno. Your happiness, your well-being and your family always come first! I believe you will succeed because now you know the truth and that you are not “crazy” and the problem is not with you. When we are surrounded by crazy people, we start to feel crazy, it happened to me, and that’s why normal people start to feel crazy in Portugal, when they don’t know the truth about the cesspool in which they live.

May everything go well for you.

 Reply
Patricia Gomes
 Reply to  Blog Author
 8 months ago
Thank you so much for your kind words and for helping us to spread our experiences to the world. So more and more people can really have an idea about what Portugal is, not the Portugal sold in expats websites. I love reading the experiences of others and can relate to many of them, it gives me some comfort knowing that I’m not the only one who sees Portugal beyond the facade. Thank you

 Reply
Miguel Gomes
 1 year ago
Here’s my advice, because that’s what I did 2 years ago (with little money in my pocket): DON’T STAY IN PORTUGAL. Portugal is a place for meek, dreamless and passive people and also the thousands and thousands and thousands of swindlers who make a career, Swindlers in dental clinics, real estate agencies, car dealerships, lawyers, politicians… Everything in Portugal can be a scam … It may seem like it’s difficult and complicated to leave, especially if you don’t have money, but when I turned my back on Portugal (a shitty place) I felt freedom and relief… I’ll never go back!!! By the way, I’m Portuguese and I was wronged in court by a son of a bitch judge who ruled in favor of a swindler who robbed me, (I also had a signed contract, just like your case), YES, in Portugal it’s legal to go bankrupt and thus evade justice, con artists in Portugal open and close companies, and leave thousands of victims along the way… 😡😡😡 And the son of a bitch judge decides to ruin your life with a smile on his lips… YES, POORTUGAL HAS THE PEACE OF COWARDS!!!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Miguel Gomes
 1 year ago
Hi Miguel,

Thank you so much for your testimony and for sharing your story to warn people. I can totally relate to you, it’s also what the Portuguese did to me in the midst of an endless ocean of impunity and countless other victims. Portugal is literally bursting at the seams with protected criminals, cherished by the system and the vast majority of the population, like nowhere else in the world. Don’t be fooled by Portugal’s calm appearance, because Poortugal has the fictitious peace of cowards! I’m so glad you got out and are free now!

Don’t come to Poortugal! Don’t throw your life away!

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Blog Author
 11 months ago
I have been in court. Had a biased judge, me a foreigner against a wealthy Portuguese family. A lost case. Shared everything with the EU. Got emails back from them. I thought I was protected by EU laws. How wrong could I have been. How naive. Brussels is not interested. Maybe if we collect all our horror stories and go to the newspapers and/or to Brussels. Portugal took me a lot.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Jens
 10 months ago
This is why it is so, so dangerous to live in Portugal or even to visit! Once you’re there, you become a hostage! Portugal is a sovereignty, but of criminals, they can literally do whatever they want with your life and the lives of everyone there. We can’t ask anyone outside Portugal for help because they are a sovereignty of criminals, you are completely alone. Unfortunately, the EU is only there to send them our money, but it doesn’t protect us from anything. When will the world wake up to the truth about Portugal and stop being so damn fools! Portuguese “democracy” is just like Chinese “democracy”! I was robbed by an entire system of countless criminals, namely judges, prosecutors and all the scum that is installed in practically the entire Portuguese judicial (and political) system, with the total connivance of almost an entire population that doesn’t care, because they are the same. Portugal is literally a country made up of criminals from top to bottom! I am not exaggerating in the least, this is the pure truth about the Portuguese trash! I wish you all the best.

 Reply
Lili
 Reply to  Blog Author
 9 months ago
I feel you, if I give you some money would you be able to leave the country? Clearly it has destroyed your sanity, just reading through your texts I’m not sure if this is from a troll or a sane person, anyone can see that. Anyway, what do you want to do?

 Reply
Patricia
 Reply to  Lili
 9 months ago
Oh Lili, you clearly don’t know that he is fortunate to not live in LaLaLand Portugal anymore. He is back to his developed country after living in this Moldova’s cousin country. I’m really glad that he and his family got out because they deserve to be happy after the emotional roller coaster they were in. But of course, if you’re a Tuga than you think that everything that happens (and don’t happen) in Portugal is normal. Even so if you haven’t never set a foot in the neighbor Spain or other EU country, as many of you never crossed the border even for vacation. That’s very good for your government, ignorance is a treasure for the crooks to continue slaving and dominating you like in a communist society. The author of this blog is doing an important service to the world, exposing the real Portugal, not the one that is sold in “expats” websites and realtors fake forums. This Portugal DOES NOT exists. What exists is an underdeveloped communist depressing country that lives underneath the propaganda and the lies. I’m sorry but Portuguese will continue to do nothing to change it and will continue to emigrate in masses. This situation will never change. It’s a shame because the weather is nice, oh well.

 Reply
Paula Müller
 Reply to  Patricia
 9 months ago
👏👏👏👏👏👏👏👏👏👏

 Reply
Tom
 1 year ago
Portugal is the best place to live. Not without problems, but if you have an independent income or if you can live on a little salary, it’s a great place to live. Where in the world you can live in a moderate house of your own and pay zero property tax? And where in the world can you pay social tariff for electricity if your income is not great? And where in the world after age 55 you can receive free and subsidized health care? Where in the developed world can you live off €600 per month other than in the Azores? No property tax, no tax if you’re not rich, no heating or cooling bill and you can grow your own food.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Tom
 1 year ago
The Azores are incredibly poor. Even by Portuguese standards. Unemployment is very high. If by “independent income” you mean you have contracts abroad that pull a nice sum of money, or a good retirement fund, then yes, you can make a very nice living, even in the Azores.

Just know most Portuguese people are barely scraping by, especially now that housing and the cost of living have been inflated by golden visas, digital nomads and the like. Social welfare systems are also on the brink of collapse.

Portugal has always been poor. It’s intentionally kept that way by a handful of elite families and technocrat up and comers, and the populace is too meek and/or uneducated to do anything about it.

 Reply
Tom Tom
 Reply to  Anonymous
 11 months ago
Sure, of course, I respect all reasonable opinions and experiences. What would be the BEST country in the European Union to live for self employed people with a small monthly income of €1000 or even less?

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Tom
 1 year ago
With all due respect, if you have very little, i.e. valuables and money (there’s nothing wrong with that) and are not an active and productive citizen in society, you are obviously not at risk of having anything taken from you, as you have no relevant valuables to “lose” in Portugal. However, you’re also not free from the possibility that something very serious or even deadly (i.e. public hospitals) could happen to you “out of the blue”, anywhere and at any time, as you can read in the countless horrifying news reports you can read on this blog.

Poortugal, for the good law-abiding citizens, is a dictatorship disguised as a democracy and for criminals it’s a paradise, if you don’t mind that then you’re in the right place.

 Reply
Unknown
 1 year ago
I have read almost all the comments. Based on my personal and family experience in this country, one question has been bothering me a lot: why is it that despite my constant efforts to be friendly with the people here to avoid any problems, the closer I got to them and the more kindness I showed, the more I ended up being hurt by them for no reason? Here, everyone seems to be thinking about destroying each other. A good Portuguese person is a — Portuguese because they can’t harm anyone. I truly apologize for the things I’ve said, which lacked any feelings of love and affection.

 Reply
Foreigner
 1 year ago
Very jealous and spiteful people, if they feel that you are better than them in any field, their jealousy tentacles will start moving and they will start destroying you with everything they have. *Please stay away from this country*

 Reply
Ryan Brian
 1 year ago
Portuguese “passive aggressive” malicious scamming behaviour reflects very much in African countries behaviour, who are extremely greedy and unreasonable.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Ryan Brian
 1 year ago
For me, it’s a fact that the vast majority of Portuguese people, underneath their appearance, actually have a mentality that is typical of African countries in general at their worst, and not at all European. That automatically explains a lot. However, Portugal and the innate nastiness and stupidity of the Portuguese is unparalleled in any other country in the world.

 Reply
Ryan Brian
 1 year ago
Golpistas maliciosos! Malicious scammers! In most life spheres and services in Portugal!

 Reply
Stephan Gorgobaer
 1 year ago
At the CONT*NENTE store in Portugal we have experienced the following behaviours by the cashiers:

Giving less change, sometimes a few cents and sometimes entire €1. When asked why they do it, they respond that things like that happen and then after that comment still shortchange me again at the spot without blinking. Professionals!

Then another cashier would lean something heavy on the scales that weigh groceries, veggies and fruits and even push it down by hand while weighing groceries for us thus ending up in a much higher cost. Of course, I have noticed and asked to weigh it again, but they do it in a very cold blood and with a friendly attitude. Sometimes they would say their salary is too small to care. So sometimes I would let them have a few cents here and there.

In general many or most businesses run their business without proper documentation etc. and I as a consumer and a customer have improved many such Portuguese businesses, who now have proper technique and forms, more or less. So instead of moving out of the country I help them or even make them to improve their act and professionalism. In other words, customers must train their Portuguese professionals, cause many Portuguese business owners do not care to train their staff, all they care is to make money without providing decent living for their employees and training them.

As Germans would say: Must haff propah toollez!!

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
In Portugal football comes first and politics comes second. It’s corrupt football that controls the country, not corrupt politicians. Mess with one of them or their family and they will harass you and make your life an entire hell. No wonder many footballers are being sold to tyrannical countries these days. But then they like to show off how charitable they are to pretend otherwise because all they have is money.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Plus, the easiest way to get a job in a highly competitive society where the lacking of jobs is high like Portugal, is to get into football, through the sport itself or through relatives connected to it.

 Reply
James Waller
 1 year ago
Beware of Poortuguese dentists! Stay away!

 Reply
James Waller
 1 year ago
For years I have been criticizing the Portuguese postal service (CTT) on a Facebook group called “Denúncias CTT/CTT Expresso” (with over 6000 members). CTT has been privatized in 2014 and has been riddled with incompetence and problems. The Portuguese would heavily criticize CTT and the group would accept their posts since the group was created to post CTT/CTT Expresso Complaints. But wait! It is okay for the Portuguese to criticize their own postal service, but NOT for foreigners or immigrants! No way! You’re not allowed as long as you’re not a Portuguese. Thus I was banned from the group even if I provided documented proof of incompetence and I did not break any rules of the group. The guys who would post severe criticisms about CTT on the group would attack me for no reason when I did the same. I have noticed this behaviour among the Portguese when they discriminate foreigners either in a good or a bad way. This prevents immigrants from integrating into the Portuguese society.

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Portugal is a dangerous country for women:

https://www.portugaltoday.news/article/disappearance-of-brazilian-nurse-in-portugal-father-describes-her-as-a-good-and-hardworking-person

 Reply
Dinis Fernandes
 1 year ago
“Only people with a Portuguese mindset can live in Portugal. That is to be a crook or a person without dreams, resigned and indifferent to evil.” I can understand why crooks and thieves in Portugal are taking holidays, living in luxury homes, jogging by the sea in Ericeira or being re-elected to government positions, because the portuguese society is rotten, it is a breeding ground for bloodsucking lawyers and judges without moral values, and thieving “businessmen” who make a career out of it…

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
“Nothing happens in Portugal; “there is no drama; everything is intrigue and plot,” wrote someone in graffiti along the wall of a Santa Catarina staircase leading down to the Bica lift. Nothing happens; that is, nothing is inscribed – in history, individual existence, social life, or on an artistic level. Perhaps that’s why the most solid and traditional studies in Portugal are those that refer to the historical past, in a desperate desire to inscribe, to record, to give consistency to what tends incessantly to fade away (and which, by all rights, has already been inscribed – but where?). Curiously, that graffiti tried to inscribe the impossibility of inscribing…

We’ll discuss later the legitimacy of talking about the “Portuguese” as a single, undifferentiated entity, which poses many problems. We’ll assume that these have been partly resolved. Let’s note, for the moment, that all Portuguese people constantly talk about the “Portuguese” who “are like this” or “like that.” This entity exists and deserves to be considered even as fiction or an illusion of opinion.
Portuguese non-inscription differs from other countries in its generality and the mechanisms by which it proceeds. For example, after the Second World War, the Germans refused to include the Third Reich and Nazism in their existence, as well as in their history. For decades, high school history textbooks reduced them to an “episode” mentioned in ten or twenty lines. This “blank” or invisible gap, or non-inscription, is (still) having unpredictable effects on German society, and it’s certainly not unrelated to the rise of neo-Nazism.

In a completely different way, April 25th refused to inscribe the 48 years of Salazarist authoritarianism in reality.

There were no trials of Pides or those responsible for the old regime. On the contrary, an immense pardon veiled the repressive, emasculating, and humiliating reality from which we came. It was as if the affirmative exaltation of the “Revolution” could sweep away this dark past in one fell swoop. This is how the colonial war, the vexations, the crimes, the culture of fear, and the mediocre smallness that Salazarism engendered were obliterated from our consciences and our lives. But you can’t build a “white” (psychic or historical), eliminate reality and the forces that produce it without the same or other stigmas reappearing here and there, bearing witness to what you wanted to erase and which insists on remaining.

When mourning doesn’t inscribe the loss of an affective bond (a force) in reality, the dead and death will haunt the living relentlessly.
In another respect, the non-inscription seems more severe because it has yet to liquidate itself since we inherited it from Salazarism.
If, in a certain sense, it was said until recently (today it is said a lot) that “nothing has changed” despite the freedoms that have been won, it is because much has been inherited and remains of the old inertias and mentalities from the dictatorship era: from fear, which survives in other forms, to the “irresponsibility” that still predominates in Portuguese behavior.

In Salazar’s time, “nothing happened” by excellence. While mired in a pervasive and omnipresent evil, individual existence never came to life’s surface. And what was life at that time? Salazarism’s moral ideal dictated that a succession of obscure acts were all the more valuable because they were modest, humble, and unnoticed. Where could they be recorded without public space and collective time for Salazar’s Catholic vision?

Where else but in the mute eternity of souls, according to Salazar’s Catholic vision?

As in many other respects, today’s Portugal prolongs the old regime. Non-inscription doesn’t date back to the present; it’s an old habit that comes above all from the refusal imposed on the individual to register. Registering implies action, affirmation, and decisions with which the individual achieves autonomy and meaning for their existence. It was Salazarism that taught us irresponsibility, reducing us to children, big children, and infantilized adults.
April 25th opened up a complex process of intense struggle against non-inscription, at least on a restricted level, with provisional governments taking “definitive” measures, creating “irreversible facts (laws, institutions)” before they fell, in the desperate desire to leave a work done, indestructible, with which they would contribute to the construction of the new society. Simply put, the substrate of non-inscription was still alive, and all this frantic and delirious activity to inscribe the Revolution- through writing history- did nothing more than feed the impossibility of inscribing, which was indeed inscribed in the depths (or on the entire surface) of the Portuguese unconscious.

This is how political discourse became dominant in Portuguese life. At a certain point, it spilled over into civil society, identifying all power with political power. The only opportunities to inscribe anything in individual or collective existence had to pass through political power.

This is also how Portuguese Social Life, now pacified and normalized, saw non-inscription regain its privileges in all its splendor. A minister who illegally takes advantage of the law to evade the tax authorities resigns, only to resurface unscathed months or years later; a scandal that tarnishes the actions of a government official, far from removing him from politics for good, can even be an opportunity to start a career with an even brighter future (a better-paid post or one with international prestige, etc.). Nothing really matters; nothing is irremediable; nothing is inscribed.”

[Josè Gil, author]

 Reply
Susana Sanchez
 1 year ago
Great blog👏 I agree with everything except one thing! You describe the following:”… This article is not about the (genuinely) decent and upstanding Portuguese, albeit not more than 5%, as I perceive it and according to my anecdotal experience, but about the remaining 95% made up of crooks, idiots as as well as the conniving/passive/simpletons who constantly look the other way (which makes them equally guilty/responsible for the perpetual tragic situation) who, for a variety of reasons, turn life in Portugal a hell and a very dangerous and unhappy place to live in, with the real potential to destroy your life… ” I DON’T AGREE with the 95%, from what I know about Portugal and the Portuguese I say it’s 99% 😀😀😀😀😀

 Reply
Roger
 1 year ago
Portugal is the country of death and your happiness is the first to die! 💯💯 The worst country in the world to invest your money, the Portuguese are the worst consumers in the world. Fake and pathetic country, 99% of the population has no opinion about anything, the Portuguese are cowards and live happily side by side with the rampant corruption that happens in Portugal.

 Reply
Jean Claude
 1 year ago
Good job. A year ago I sold my house in Cascais and moved my company to Germany, and it was the best decision of my life. A very similar situation to yours happened to me in the Portuguese “courts”, and I decided to turn my back on the corrupt justice system that I was subjected to. My family and our mental health are all I have, and I will never let Portugal take that away from me. Portugal is toxic, and the Portuguese are toxic!!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Jean Claude
 1 year ago
Thank you. I’m happy for you, it was the best thing you could have done in Portugal. It’s very true, we must never allow anything or anyone to take away our happiness and the well-being of our family. It’s all we have and it’s the most important thing.

 Reply
Anon
 1 year ago
There’s a lot of exploitation and abuse going on at Portuguese companies. Do you think you could post about Lisbon’s mafia-like call centers? I can provide links and information. Tel*performance, Maj*rel, Rand*tad, Webh*lp… They’re the worst. Especially Tel*performance (check link).

https://www.facebook.com/TasLogadoLx/posts/…

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anon
 1 year ago
Without singling out specific companies, there is a culture of real labor terrorism in Portugal, not in all Portuguese companies of course, but there is a culture of deliberately causing great intimidation and fear among workers as a means of exploiting workers in terms of working hours and workload, as well as a method used, when it suits them, to force workers to quit “voluntarily” by causing intolerable stress so that the company doesn’t have to pay fair financial compensation for dismissal and breach of employment contract. There are laws against this, but like everything else in Poortugal, it’s all a make-believe, and to hell with the people! Nobody cares about anybody!

Yes, you can post links and information to other sites that talk about the topic, as long as the information is minimally credible and of general interest, but as the author of the blog, I should and must disclaim any responsibility and relationship of support or denial of the information provided.

I can only write articles about specific cases based on news that is circulating in the Portuguese media, so as not to be accused of “making things up”. Unfortunately, the Portuguese media also often hides and protects a lot of things and a lot of people, making it very difficult to find in-depth reports on all the terribly bad things that happen in Portugal. Fortunately, the site’s commenters fill in the gaps and enrich this blog with their opinions and personal stories.

 Reply
Bernard
 1 year ago
I was forced to live in Portugal for 3 years by the company I work for. I am no longer in Portugal, but I can say that just trying to live day to day was painful! I worked in the Netherlands and Germany and in those countries I never experienced the situations I experienced in Portugal. In Portugal I met racist, envious and scheming coworkers. Pathetic country with caveman mentality. Great blog!!!! 👏👏

 Reply
James Waller
 Reply to  Bernard
 1 year ago
Why are a lot of Portuguese workers damaging owner’s property during work? Are they retarded?

 Reply
Karma
 Reply to  James Waller
 1 year ago
100%

 Reply
António Ribeiro
 1 year ago
My life in Portugal

I’m Portuguese, I’ve been living in Barcelona for 20 years, I’m 48 today. This blog is everything I’ve ever thought about Portugal and the Portuguese. I left Portugal after 8 years of working hard at So*ae for a miserable salary. I realised that my colleagues were complacent people with no ambitions, they never had money to travel, but they thought and created stories in their heads that everything that wasn’t Portuguese or Portugal was bad. So ignorant! I think they’re happy like that, they’d rather not know, because deep down they know they’re very mediocre. I’ve achieved economic stability in Spain and I already have a company, I won’t say more because the envy of the Portuguese is radioactive :). I only go to Portugal once a year for a week to see my parents, but every time I go I see a country that is stuck in time, outdated at every level. Yes, it’s true, the Portuguese love corrupt people. Yes, it’s true, if the Portuguese have the opportunity and the position to steal, they do, and they don’t see it as a problem for Portuguese society. The Portuguese love to live in shit all their lives!!!! Portugal is not Europe! Keep up the good work. PS: You can write this testimony of mine in English, because I don’t speak English.

— Original text in Portuguese —

Minha vida em Portugal

Sou português, vivo em Barcelona há 20 anos, hoje tenho 48 anos. Este blogue é tudo o que sempre pensei de Portugal e dos Portugueses. Saí de Portugal depois de trabalhar arduamente na So*ae durante 8 anos, com um salário miserável. Percebi que os meus colegas de trabalho eram pessoas acomodadas e sem ambições, nunca tiveram dinheiro para viajar mas achavam e criavam histórias na cabeça deles que tudo que não fosse português ou Portugal era mau. Tão ignorantes! Acho que são felizes assim, preferem não saber, porque no fundo sabem que são muito medíocres. Consegui em Espanha estabilidade económica e tenho já uma empresa, não descrevo mais, porque a inveja dos portugueses é radioativa :). Apenas vou à Portugal uma vez por ano durante uma semana para ver meus pais, mas vejo cada vez que vou, um País estagnado no tempo, ultrapassado a todos os níveis. Sim é verdade, os portugueses adoram corruptos. Sim é verdade, se os portugueses tiverem oportunidade e num cargo que possam roubar eles roubam, e não vêem isso como um problema da sociedade portuguesa. Os portugueses adoram viver toda a vida na merda!!!! Portugal não é Europa! Continua o teu bom trabalho. PS: pode colocar este meu testemunho mas em Inglês, pois não sei inglês

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  António Ribeiro
 1 year ago
Dear António,

Thank you for your testimony and support. If the vast majority of Portuguese people had your integrity, straightforwardness and common sense, Portugal would certainly be a great country, but unfortunately only evil, mediocrity and infinite stupidity pervade in such concentration as nowhere else in the world. May the good Portuguese people like you not be the last ones who stay to turn off the lights, I believe that Portugal is condemned to absolute irrelevance, because only goodness and intelligence create value, beauty and happiness, while evil and stupidity (they always come together) only want to constantly destroy the value, prosperity, beauty and happiness that the goodness and intelligence create, until there is nothing left. For some reason, the happiest moments in a person’s life happen when we do good to someone (who deserves it) and not necessarily when we only give gifts to ourselves. All the best, my friend, I’m very happy for you!

 Reply
João
 1 year ago
So, Portugal is corrupt? Definitely. How about the UK? Don’t even get me started on the mighty US of A.

I understand you’re hurt and now hide behind a laptop, playing the keyboard hero. Guess what? Your mental health is deteriorating, and you’re achieving nothing. Not to mention, you’re highly xenophobic and close-minded. Do yourself a favor: see a therapist and address all that hatred. Look at what happened to Germany.

Take your brilliant business plans and strive to be the successful person you want to be. But beware: if you’re this naive, you’ll face difficulties not just in Portugal, but everywhere. Capitalism is ruthless, and if you want to profit from it, I wish you the best of luck. Unfortunately, you lack the intelligence to succeed, and you risk getting dumber (and poorer) while wasting time on a blog like this, spreading hatred, xenophobia, and racism.

You might hate me for this comment, but deep down, you know I’m right. If you don’t, you’re blind. But I’m sure you’ll remember these words in your later years (assuming you live that long), poor and near the end of your life. Good luck.

 Reply
Jimbo
 Reply to  João
 5 months ago
Truth hurts, João, I know.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  João
 1 year ago
Portuguese people. A mix of inbreed for centuries. With the most horrible history, slavery ( for 400 years and over 6 million slaves traded ) The inquisition, kicked out all the jews the ones who stayed were forced to convert( they were forced to leave their childeren in PT ). See what is left : a pity, corrupted poor country with vicious, primitive evil people. Any comment on that Joao ??

 Reply
Spike
 1 year ago
Hopefully you left so the rest of us can enjoy it.

 Reply
Cata
 1 year ago
Im portuguese and all I can say is thank u for this blog. I’ve never realised how bad Portugal really is. To be honest I couldn’t even finish this whole article because I’ve always seen my country as a normal actually nice place to live in. I wonder if I’ve just been lucky this whole time to never have to face any of these awful events or really just ignorant. Truth is stuff like being stubborn and the shit talking was very normal to me. I really see how ignorant I was so thank u for opening my eyes. I truly am sorry to all the people that put their trust in Portugal and in the end just suffered in the hands of the portuguese. I hope happiness and peace finds you. All the portuguese hating on the author and this blog should be ashamed of themselves. We see real people and real events that happened how can people be so ignorant. This blog is nothing but helpful not only to foreigners but to the portuguese too instead of getting defensive maybe think about how much damage the portuguese have caused to people how we’re the problem. You’re all just proving the authors point of being close minded ignorant people. Thank you for this blog and for bringing awareness it’s extremely necessary

 Reply
Y.M.
 1 year ago
Could you make an article about the threat to women who move to Portugal?

I had no idea how evil Portuguese are to women; even Portuguese, or other European women living in Portugal, help harm expats and immigrants.
None of the “pros and cons” articles online talk about the abuses women will experience in Portugal: legitimate businesses disrespecting and defrauding women: lying during sales, fraudulent billing, denying help. Also, the entitlement of targeting women who reside alone or are unmarried. How women here help harassers and gypsies target other women who are not European (in my case, an American). Also, while not my personal experience, the judicial system neglects domestic abuse cases.

No one warn women to not move to Portugal. Someone should. Could you please post an article about this? I will gladly share my specific experiences, in less than a year, I have suffered. But I am not a rare case; on tiktok, facebook, etc there are many women who have suffered in Portugal and no one warned us before facing the disgusting behavior we have to endure.

Thanks.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Y.M.
 1 year ago
Thanks for the suggestion. This is a very serious and tragic problem that needs to be brought to attention, and foreign women are even more likely to be victims because of the envy and prejudice of the Portuguese in general towards foreigners. I’m going to try to write a good article on this subject. The problem is that I have to base this article on information published by the Portuguese media, but unfortunately there are only occasional reports (as with almost everything else that is unfavorable to Portugal’s image as an “idyllic” country), and I haven’t found anything with enough depth and substance to be worth translating, but I will try again. That’s why people’s individual testimonies and experiences, shared in the comments on this site, are also very important to warn and save others.

That said, Portuguese men in general have a “macho” mentality, more or less accentuated, which in the end only serves to hide their own insecurities and frustrations. Unfortunately, many Portuguese women are also complicit in this mentality, strange as it may seem, probably because they have also been brought up to be submissive to their husbands, something so typical of cave societies. What’s more, Portuguese women are often the cruelest to other women. In Portugal, even the authorities and the “justice system” implicitly treat women as the inferior and subordinate sex most of the time, and they are also often accused, directly or indirectly, of being the “sluts”. I’ve already written some shocking articles about this on this blog.

I’m very busy at the moment, but I’ll be posting lots of new articles in a while so that the world can get to know a bit more about the real Portuguese society, and so that people can protect and defend themselves, or better still, avoid Portugal altogether, which is always the best option. There is absolutely nothing good in Portugal for good and decent people, it only offers misery and sadness!

 Reply
Levi
 1 year ago
I found this blog when I did a Google search for “why Portuguese lawyers are crooks”. I was happy because I was able to understand what was happening to me. A Portuguese lawyer and a real estate agent were trying to scam me when buying a house. After reading this blog I gave up on buying the house and I am going to Spain. What a crazy country!!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Levi
 1 year ago
I am so, so happy for you and that this blog has prevented another person from getting swindled in that lawless slum full of “legalized” crooks, masquerading as a European country. Fortunately, you escaped in time! Poortugal is a very, very dangerous place!

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Indeed it is. As a foreigner you are totally outlawed. I speak from experience. A horrible culture!

 Reply
Sergio
 1 year ago
I’m Portuguese and I’m happy to have found this blog, which talks about what the real Portugal is and what the Portuguese are. I’m planning and preparing my exit from this shitty “country” before this year ends. I’m a doctor and Portugal is in serious trouble and all governments are trying to hide the true reality of this place. Trying to live in this society is totally impossible, Portugal has a rotten and toxic society, without opinion, racists, jealous of everything and everyone including Europeans🤮 I’m going to leave as soon as possible… Portugal has the power to end your life and your happiness. Don’t stop reporting the real Portugal.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Sergio
 1 year ago
Thanks for your support, I’ll never stop, I regard this site as a public service. You are absolutely right, Portugal is tearing apart due to how rotten it is, and nobody is telling the truth, but the Portuguese don’t want to know either. Portugal is an unviable and completely sclerosed country that is temporarily resting on feet of clay. Please save yourself and your family. I wish you all the best, my friend.

 Reply
Stupid Portugee
 1 year ago
I am Portuguese and I agree with a lot here about how horrible my family is because of years of poverty, pedophiles in the Catholic church, and living under a dictator that protected them from Nazi’s in the 1940, yet kept them broke, religous and fucking stupid. I cannot disagree with you there.

However, I can agree with you all day, but like a man who drives miles to murder someone. What does it take for a man to create a website, use such wonderful use of the English language to point out the flaws of another culture, literally create a website, learn html, and have page after page of grievance’s? Seriously what kind of man does something like that?

Well I know a lot of vindictive Portuguese men who do. I can shit on my people and other people because seriously I hate all cultures, but writing a blog and answering to other peoples hate and their inner demons? That takes a lot of being stuck in your own narcissism. Thank you for the learning lesson today. Forgiveness!

Sometimes when we think other people are being shitty and justified, watch out for our own actions.

And yes, the Portuguese culture has been awful for a long time, even the Japanese word for fish Sakana, means bastard in Portuguese, well they were calling them bastards. Most Portuguese people should be ashamed of themselves, but they should not waste their time reading anyone elses disgust, especially no one from any other culture who is just as stupid.

I am in agreement, I am just as stupid, and blinded by my own Portuguese narcissism. You don’t have to be Portuguese to have this human trait.

Also, when you think you have out shittied someone else, always remember there is always someone who will out shitty you!

Last edited 1 year ago by Stupid Portugee
 Reply
Katarzyna
 1 year ago
Thank you for writing all this on your blog. I discovered it by accident yesterday typing “why are portuguese people so stupid” and you made my day. I am Polish and I lived in Porto for 8 years with portuguese husband and a daughter. I was suffering every day: loneliness, being stuck at home (he never wanted to go anywhere with us and I had no driving licence), xenophobia (his mother forbade me to speak Polish to the child, but I insisted), rejection, mismatch… you name it. He and his fmaily had literally no horizons, they didn’t want to know anything, they didn’t want to talk about anything important, they were boring and stagnant. And fake. Which I discovered when from day one to another he asked for divorce. He changed 180%, showing his coldblooded cruelty, his real primitive face and no morals or empathy to us. I managed to run from there to my home counrty with my daughter and now, after psychological recovery, I am standing back on my feet. Till now I fought I was crazy and paranoid thinking everything that is written here was only my imagination. But I trully suffered. Thank you. And sorry for my English 🙂 All the best and keep posting. Everyone has to be warned about Portugal, especially women who come there from abroad.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Katarzyna
 1 year ago
Thank you for your very important comment and testimony. I’m very happy that you escaped from the Portuguese hell and that you can now be very happy with your daughter in Poland, which is guaranteed to be an infinitely better place than Poortugal. It should be noted that practically all the Eastern European countries that have come out from under the communist and Soviet boot and that have only been members of the EU for a (relatively) short time have now overtaken Portugal and will continue to do so, even though Portugal has been receiving endless streams of money from the EU taxpayers every day (since 1986!), not to mention the various and extremely costly financial bailouts in between, practically 1 every 10 years, imagine that! Not even that fixes Portugal, on the contrary, it’s getting worse and poorer by the day. (Most EU funds are stolen or widely misused and squandered)

Your English is very good, but even if it wasn’t, it wouldn’t matter a bit. I’m very grateful to you for sharing your story, which will prevent many good people from having their lives and happiness literally destroyed in Portugal. All the best for you and your daughter 🙂

 Reply
Carlos Santos
 1 year ago
I’m 42 years old, I’m Portuguese, and I hate everything about Poortugal. I left this shitty country when I didn’t get justice in a case involving the purchase of a house. The “company” that sold the houses with owners who were professional swindlers already had dozens of legal proceedings, but the Portuguese courts did nothing to remove the swindler from circulation. He opened and closed companies one after another, always with the same scheme… Portugal is a facade country full of incompetent scum, who love to see you in disgrace. After 4 years of suffering and without most of my savings, I went to Germany and opened my company. It was one of the best decisions I made in my life, you pay your taxes and Germany protects you and even insists on helping you. I feel like a true CITIZEN in Germany. Never risk your money in any business in Portugal, you will lose everything. F*ck you Poortugal!!!

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Carlos Santos
 1 year ago
I have had a false claim, an unfair trial with false witnesses in a little village in PT. Was totally outlawed. I wrote a dozen and more emails to get help from Brussels. They know how corrupted PT is but cant do anything. The worst things happened to me in PT in less then 6 months. Then I fled out of the country. What a horror. Still have a little boy there living but do not dare to go back. Afraid of my ex family in law who have some influence and love to hate and hate to love and love to make my life miserable and that of my son. I am back in Scandinavia. Back to civilized world. I can understand your frustration. I have lived in different countries and have travelled the world but this goes far beyond every nightmare. We should spread it out and cancel that country. Viel Erfolg in Deutschland.

 Reply
Carlos Santos
 Reply to  Jens
 1 year ago
I’m Portuguese, I’ve been living here in Germany for 4 years and when I decided to move to Germany and build my company, I was mistreated by my family and they despised my dream. They are truly people without horizons, passive-aggressive, devoid of any feelings for anyone, they hate knowing what good is being done in other countries and they don’t want to know anything, they are racist and envious. I speak from experience because unfortunately I have had to listen to a lot of stupidity at family gatherings! Now I will never have to go through this torture again. I’ve already told my story on this blog. The Portuguese will forever be trapped in their unbridled stupidity and increasingly isolated. POORTUGAL is definitely the slum of Europe. In Portugal every day there is news and scandals (not for the Portuguese who don’t see this as a problem, of course) related to theft and embezzlement of millions of European funds. The most recent scandal is that of a “businessman” who allegedly embezzled more than 40 million euros of European funds over 10 years!!! For those 10 years he lived in a luxury hotel with money from European funds (yes, he lived in a luxury hotel in Portugal). In Poortugal, thieves are always addressed and called “Mr. Businessman”. I wish you all the best away from Portugal and especially from the Portuguese. Leaving Poortugal was the best decision of my life, I have a very healthy economic life due to the fact that I came to Germany. I always advise everyone not to bury money in Poortugal, you will lose. It happened to me… I wish you all the best!!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Jens
 1 year ago
I hope you get your son back. I can’t imagine the suffering you are going through. Portuguese justice is a total fraud, fenced in by sovereignty, so we can’t turn to anyone outside for help!
Poortugal is a living hell for all good people! The only way to avoid disaster is to never set foot in Poortugal or to escape from it as soon as feasible.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Carlos Santos
 1 year ago
I can relate to everything you’ve written, it’s basically what happened to me, but in another sector, it’s horrifying and it’s the pure truth of everyday life in Poortugal. Poortugal is in fact a paradise for criminals and a hellish nightmare for honest, hardworking people! In Poortugal, criminals have a free pass for life, until it’s your turn to be their next victim.

Exactly, in Germany you are a true citizen! In Poortugal you’re just an insignificant fly to be stepped on, robbed and humiliated! When you need the country the most, it doesn’t exist! On the contrary, you only find endless scumbags doing everything they can to bring you down!

Thank you, Carlos, for your so valuable contribution, which will inspire many people, and for your very serious warnings. I see you’re doing well now and you’ve gotten rid of the Portuguese latrine. I’m very happy for you, it was undoubtedly the best decision you could have made, we all have the right to be happy, but in Poortugal happiness is the first thing that is stolen from you! I wish you all the best and a lot of success in Germany, where everything is possible! Indeed, F*ck you Poortugal!

 Reply
Forever
 1 year ago
Two-faced cowards with broken families. They are united in only one situation, that is when they want to ax another root. Do not trust the Portuguese at all because you will pay a heavy price in the near future.

 Reply
Aguiar
 1 year ago
Hello, as a portuguese I agree 100% with you.

And I cringe and feel second hand embarrassment for everything obvious and that 99% of the population chooses to willfully ignore.

Even the portuguese between themselves, hate each other, there’s really no sense of union and people will scam and steal each other whenever someone gets the chance. This is my experience.

It isn’t like this everywhere – I was born in a small city in the north of the country, I lived my best years until I was 15 years old. Then, I had to move with my mother to Lisbon. I ended up building my life here through some difficulty and challenge, and I’m 40, now. I hate it here. Everyday I feel the need of getting away from this hell and to go live up on the mountain or in the middle of the forest with nobody around for miles on end. This is the trauma left for being forced to interact daily with scammers and people that just want to see you fail and suffer. Portugal’s like a no-man’s land.

I’m having a blast reading through your articles and I can confirm in each and every one, YES, YOU’RE RIGHT. AND I’M SORRY, I’M ONE OF THEM.

As a result of being aware of this, I have no friends, nobody who to really trust other than a very few elements of my close family.

We needed more testimonies like yours. Cheers.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Aguiar
 1 year ago
I emphasize with you. Good luck. Try to get out one day and built your life somewere else. Not easy but not impossible either.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Aguiar
 1 year ago
Sadly, this is the reality in Portugal. Life must be lived with joy, and with friends it’s even better, but in Portugal it’s almost impossible to make real friends or only with a lot of luck, the vast majority of people are very self-interested, envious as hell or downright shallow. You are a young man and you have a lot to live for and to achieve, but not in Portugal, because Portugal is a latrine, especially in human terms. The further away from those very toxic creatures the better IMO.

Now I’m telling you, you’re definitely not one of them, because otherwise you wouldn’t have written this comment (just read the “kind” of comments from the really bad Portuguese on this site). You were just born in Portugal, or had the misfortune to be born in Portugal, but you are definitely not part of that Portuguese mass in its worst and most degenerate form. I wish you all the best from the bottom of my heart! Portugal doesn’t deserve people like you! The good and capable people of Portugal are constantly cornered by the overwhelming majority of mediocre, losers and envious people, for the simple reason that they feel threatened because they are perfectly aware that they are a fraud and a nullity and are therefore terrified of being discovered.

 Reply
Andy pink
 1 year ago
I am a British/US citizen and have visited Portugal 3 times-all locations, with my Brazilian wife and we have always been met with politeness and friendly faces, perhaps because we approach locals with polite friendly faces! I try to speak Portuguese and am always offered help and appreciation for my efforts , with more smiling faces. Go figure!!!

 Reply
Crook Scammer
 Reply to  Andy pink
 1 year ago
Crooks do know how to carefully and politely address their potential victims!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Andy pink
 1 year ago
There’s a big difference between visiting or living in the country and really needing the country. They are entirely different situations. There’s also a big difference between superficial friendliness and real honesty.

That’s not to say that there aren’t genuinely good and humble Portuguese people, the problem is that there are very few of them (and we don’t know who they are).

But the most serious thing is that there is no country, everything is broken, starting with the hijacked democracy. An extremely dangerous place to be!!

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Andy pink
 1 year ago
You hust have been lucky. Read the articles and the figures. What is the purpose of your post? That one should do more efforts ?

 Reply
Carlos Peixoto
 Reply to  Andy pink
 1 year ago
The British is the VIP client there’s no question about.

 Reply
Carlos Peixoto
 1 year ago
Portugal is a country of whores and green wine.

110587_800x800
 Reply
Not matter
 1 year ago
Never trust Portuguese under any circumstances. For a Portuguese, it doesn’t matter how good you are, they will hit you in any situation. This is a principle in Portugal. Portugal is cursed

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
at the doctor ( in cold blood )
I had been waiting for many months to see a doctor because I use insulin. In the absence of doctor’s appointments, I have had to decide myself how to medicate myself. I have had to buy expensive blood glucose meters myself: most recently one that also measures ketones. The risk of death has increased. I have never been to an endocrinologist. For a diabetes nurse once (and also the last time) in three years. I have not received a referral to the diabetes association. All blocked without any explanation. Now I waited 1.5 hours for my turn and then it happened: I was skipped. First was skipped a woman number 142.
My shift number was 138 and after 137 came 155…I went to ask the guard for help, who fixed it ! He went and waited outside the door and arranged meeting to me. When I entered the room, GP immediately started complaining in Portuguese that she doesn’t speak English. I apologized for not knowing enough Portuguese. Then he picked up the phone and called his superior in my presence like a defiant, why is he being given such a patient (who doesn’t speak Portuguese). The supervisor came. He complained again with the same words and not once watched at me: I was not a person anymore! I watched all this like a movie. I was calm because this was it : my only chance.
So this doctor wanted to choose who to treat and jumped over those he didn’t want to treat: cold bloodedly.
Now he wanted the manager to throw me out! However, I was prepared. I had everything in Portuguese: current medication, why I was there, another Portuguese doctor’s statement, etc. He got it all right in front of his nose, but he wasn’t interested in that. He read them all. He wasn’t interested in anything about me because I was a foreigner(?).
I had already put everything in advance by email when I was looking for an appointment. The Portuguese doctor had written two pages comprehensively that was now on the table in front of him. Nothing was enough! I had done 80% of his work so that I would get that precious referral to a specialist.
His chief asked me twice why I am there.
I just said that I cannot medicate myself and my insulin dose has risen very much etc. I tried to say as I could that I need somebody to look after my diabetes medication because I am not a doctor. So simple.
It came at last. He said: He needs to meet an endocrinologist.
Now I’m waiting to see if the specialist cancels me: in cold blood!

 Reply
Nuno
 1 year ago
As a Portuguese son of Portugueses it is my sole purpouse in life to make foreigners stay in my country as miserable as possible. We are SICK AND TIRED of foreigners! GO HOME!
Go to your country! Dont come here inflating our prices and competing with us for houses and services!
And you can take our traitor president with you

 Reply
Ted Dibiase
 Reply to  Nuno
 11 months ago
Take your relatives back from Cambridge, Ontario. You’re all filth.

 Reply
Julien
 Reply to  Nuno
 1 year ago
Yep… typical Portuguese victim mentality.
It’s not the foreigners who are raising the prices of the rent and services, it’s the greedy Portuguese owners jacking them up to take advantage and by proxy, causing misery for the Portuguese who are now forced to move to lower rent areas.

You may be sick and tired of tourists but if you had no tourists your country would take a large financial hit effecting many peoples jobs and income. You can’t have it both ways.

 Reply
Janer Joplins
 Reply to  Julien
 1 year ago
Exactly!

 Reply
Marc
 Reply to  Nuno
 1 year ago
I do not know what you’re talking about. Who wants to live in your miserable country ? We all know that Portugal is a very xenofobic country. Blame the foreigners or your misery. But you will notice that once the foreigners left, your life will become even more miserable.

 Reply
Marc
 Reply to  Nuno
 1 year ago
You don’t have to tell this to the foreigners. They all find out what a miserable country full of toxic, vicious and primitive people you are. You will stay poor for ever and this is what you deserve. There is nothing nice about your complaining, passive , fatalistic envyies corrupted society.

 Reply
papitchulo
 Reply to  Marc
 1 year ago
Good, now tell other foreigners to go home

 Reply
The realist
 1 year ago
Didn’t read the entire article but I can tell you one thing… the Portuguese pride on being incompetent and if you dare to say something about it, you’ll be treated worse than the devil. They’re also lazy and avoid work like the plague. Common sense and thinking for their own hasn’t reached the country yet either and that’s why it’s in the state that it’s in. If only they’d be kicked out of the European Union, they the rest of Europe wouldn’t have to pay for their sorry asses anymore.

 Reply
Not Important who
 1 year ago
I myself have lived 8 years in total in Portugal, divided over 2 periods. From 2002 till 2006 and the past 4 years.

Although I had some experiences with bad people here and sure some racism as well, I never had the feeling it was that bad. Overall, the people seem very open and friendly to me.
I figured the racism and criminal minded were more in the backward parts, the little towns and sleepy villages.

The corruption of course being all over the country, on all levels of government and institutions, but this is no different in most other countries. It is just more clear in countries like Portugal & Spain than it is in some northern European countries.

But after reading your article and the comments beneath, especially, it has really opened my eyes to this. The hateful comments in particular, by some angry, offended Portuguese, strengthens the accuracy of your article only more. But I guess they are too unaware of a people to even realize that their hateful comment achieved only that …

We ourselves have been thinking a lot about our place here, and it isn’t even just about the high taxes and bad people. I almost can’t see the beauty of the country any longer, when all I see is Eucalyptus trees, another result of mafia practices …

I am convinced there isn’t a place on earth that is perfect to live the way we want. I lived in 5 different countries, so I got some experience. But surely there has to be a place where people can live in peace, where they are left alone, as long as they do not hurt others, damage their surroundings and mind their own business?
Without being extorted by government for half your income? Treated fair and not being scammed all the time by people who deliver bad services?

If anyone knows of a place that maybe doesn’t tick all boxes, but comes close to it, please let me know.

Good luck to all who have expressed their misfortunes in this country here, I hope things will get better for all of you!

 Reply
Naish
 1 year ago
I have been living in Lisbon for than a year and doing business with both the foreigners and Portuguese. It’s not fair to say that all the people are awful, I have met very nice welcoming individuals as well. But I can’t argue the following attributes about the Portuguese people:
They might be the cheapest people in the whole world. They can argue for 20 cents for half an hour without even considering value of his and other people’s time. Sometimes I feel like I am living in an episode of “Extreme Cheapskates” TV series..
Unfortunately there are many frauds, more than usual than other European countries. But usually the scammers are very stupid too, sometimes that leads too very funny events. My friend has been robbed by a Portuguese who entered her house in Luxembourg. The burglar stole some tech equipments etc, but left his purse in the house he was robbing!!! :))
Portuguese usually don’t take any responsibility, extremely lazy, don’t respect timings, usually they don’t respond even if you’re a customer. No wonder this country is in poor shape, they’re too lazy to respond their clients to make money. One recent example is that We wanted to purchase a coffee machine, called a distributer, and the salesman told me he will go on a vacation and will call me back in 15 days?!! Then I sent a message to him that I will have to buy from a competitor if he won’t direct me to someone available, but he didn’t respond back.. You can experience lack of professionalism and work ethic in every aspect of your daily life in Portugal.
They are very close-minded people, they never experience new things, only consume cheap coffee, cheap beer, cheap lame Portuguese food. Btw, food and the local restaurants are terrible here, whoever says it’s good doesn’t have a clue what a good cousine is.

I can go on, but the long story short, Portugal is an overhyped country with low quality of life for high costs. It’s not cheap anymore, especially in Lisbon. If you have high amount of foreign income and want to retire in Algarve or Cascais, yes it’s nice. But it’s not real Portugal, you are living in a bobble with other rich foreigners.

 Reply
Julien
 Reply to  Naish
 1 year ago
Yes! Not sure where the hype is coming from that Portugal is a food destination. It truly has some of the worst food we have ever experienced and terrible service.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Julien
 1 year ago
A peasant primitive kitchen, without any fantasy or spice. It reflects the Portuguese population. The only difference is that food cannot lie, cheat, scam, being evil, vicious and toxic. I am sure I ve forgotten something! 😉

 Reply
Charlotte
 1 year ago
As a Portuguese person whose family is British, I can see both sides of the argument. If you Brits learned the language, integrated, respected us, stop acting like you were somewhat superior and more civilised, maybe, just maybe, your life here would be different. It’s really your fault, basically. My own British husband doesn’t want to be identified as British because he’s so ashamed of you lot. You live in your pathetic enclaves, drinking like fish, bloated and sunburnt, a bunch of ridiculous losers who still think they have an empire! And how thick and lazy are you that you are the only people in the world who cannot learn a foreign language to fluency and cannot even spell properly? Go home and stay there. It’s true, we never liked you and want rid of you because of your attitude and inability to integrate and respect our country. People like you are definitely not welcome here. Good riddance!

 Reply
Alex
 1 year ago
I’m a UK national, I’ve been living in Portugal for almost 30 years now, most of this time running my own business. I agree with the overall sentiment of the blog author and I feel everything they’ve been through. It must have been a total nightmare.
I believe there is so much nepotism at the top with high level positions held in politics, government, justice system, civil service, banking etc. being held by incompetent/below par individuals appointed by virtue of their family name, contacts, personal favours and so on. Which in turn leads to malfeasance, corruption and cover-ups and the only way to not get found it is to keep the cycle going. This is the example set from the top and trickles down through all institutions and society. Meanwhile, the real talented and competent people who have the will and ability to effect change are demoted, ridiculed, and forced out!
I don’t believe that 95% of Portuguese people are bad or horrible! But, there does seem to be a very high percentage of nasty, selfish, snide, petty, entitled individuals that we have to encounter on a daily basis – whether going about daily life in a café or seeking service in a bank or utility company etc. there is always someone to make simple tasks unnecessarily difficult.
Then who cannot but notice the following on a daily basis: aggressive and inconsiderate driving, parking all over the pavements, blocking in cars, beeping horns, opening car doors and bashing other cars, keying cars, animal neglect, dogs left to bark endlessly on verandas, leaving their dogs muck on the pavement, pushing in queues, turning up late to meetings, lunches, dinners in fact any event, dropping litter and all other anti-social behaviours….
If people can casually get away with the above-mentioned behaviours in society, many will go on to scam, defraud and rob any vulnerable unsuspecting victims, often foreigners, and the perpetrators consider themselves successful, well to do middle class businesspeople, lawyers etc. Lauded and admired. This is the example set from the very top and works its way down.
Even if it’s just 10% of the population – once you start to notice these things you see it everywhere! And it seems its everyone.
I believe most Portuguese people are equally appalled and frustrated by all this, some leave the country the rest battle on. The real problem in Portugal is the malaise apathy and indifference to it all.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Alex
 1 year ago
Very well said. There’s a lot of hyperbole on this blog and its comments. I’ve seen some comments which are pure vitriol and betray the commenter’s ignorance about Portuguese society and culture (that any Portuguese can create something interesting and of worth in this environment is nothing short of a miracle, but it does happen).

But on the other hand, like you say, if you live in Portugal, it’s impossible not to notice these things. Every country has its issues, but in Portugal, the basics of human decency are so lacking, you can’t avoid it. There’s an excess of antisocial people and no law enforcement to set them straight (Portuguese people still live in a fascist mindset, they don’t understand respect, only fear, and in this sense are basically like infants, throwing tantrums, skirting responsibility and always expecting someone to bail them out; that, plus the sheer audacity of undeserved entitlement that carries them through life, from cradle to grave).

You’re entirely correct saying the example starts at the top. Just the other day, I was walking on the sidewalk and was forced to walk on the road because a police vehicle was parked on the curb.

 Reply
Sergio
 1 year ago
I’m Portuguese, I left Poortugal 4 years ago, literally for these reasons that the Blog author describes. Living in Poortugal is dangerous. Portugal is a disgrace, the Portuguese are false, envious and professional swindlers. We moved our company to Germany, in Portugal everything works solely based on schemes and corruption (lawyers, justice). If you need to turn to a lawyer or institution in Portugal, you’re screwed!! If you want to have a happy life, your best life plan is to leave that hole, which is sinking in front of the stupid Portuguese. Good luck little Poortugal😁😁😁
Just to finish, if you want to get to know Portugal and the Portuguese mentality better, read the Portuguese comments very carefully. It’s really scary how they deny and exude evil. It is from this country and these creatures that I escaped. 😅😅😅

 Reply
Vincent Pedro
 Reply to  Sergio
 11 months ago
I am a crook, I must admit, a thief and a scammer, and I don’t like to pay taxes to foreign governments, or keep promises, and I am lazy as hell. I love to live la vida loca at someone else’s expense. I have a strict dress code, unlike most foreigners that come here or live here bitchin’. I am a swindler, and a cheat, yet I don’t hurt my own kind, the Portuguese, even that I am not of a Portuguese descent, I am naturalized in Portugal. Portugal to me is heaven, which shelters me from “honest” people and demanding Germans living by their strict rules. I love this country. Courts take forever in Portugal and the government is forgiving, and that is all I need to live a life without worry. If you don’t like it, get out!

 Reply
Paulo
 Reply to  Sergio
 1 year ago
I’m also a Portuguese that lived abroad for a considerable amount of time. I work for an multinational company, and I have to agree with what you wrote above.
For a short period I felt good being back on my own country, established on a nearby city to the main offices, and bought a house. Then my parking space was invaded by someone that decided that it was theirs to use for. Then I started to hear extreme noise on Saturdays and Sundays, because someone got a license from the municipality to throw birthday parties. Then came the time to pay taxes.
It’s only been 3 years and I am selling it all to search for a better place to live, and I identify myself with the author on this important bit: No one cares! It’s wrong, it’s plain corruption in broad daylight, and everyone srugs and moves on as if it’s the most natural thing in the world.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Sergio
 1 year ago
How refreshing to see a common sense comment from a Portuguese citizen with an evolved mentality! Because this blog isn’t even against the Portuguese, it’s just against bad people and sadly it happens that Poortugal is full of bad and very bad people. I’m just the messenger (and another victim)! But the infinite mediocrity and malice of the vast majority of Portuguese blames me instead of the real causes and culprits. Not to mention the blatant lack of empathy for the indescribable suffering and enormous financial loss I endured under their Portuguese dictatorship, in which I was denied ALL democratic and civil rights, but these idiots, as retarded as they are, don’t even realize that they live in a dictatorship! They should be thanking me for having more courage to tell the truth than almost the entire Portuguese population put together, but instead they attack me like the cowardly dogs they are! Poor things, they won’t go anywhere, that’s for sure! The world doesn’t need them for anything, they’re not even good enough to clean toilets! (Actually, they haven’t even reached the human state!)

The best decision of your life, I must say, and very good advice, by the way! Germany wins, Poortugal loses 🙂! I’m happy for you! I wish you all the best, my friend!

 Reply
Cristiano ronaldo
 1 year ago
Everyone on this website is just a racist loser, you all just sad your country is not as beautiful neither are your people. Womp womp kys

 Reply
Dr. Seuss
 Reply to  Cristiano ronaldo
 1 year ago
Beautiful people yes, beautiful from afar, far from beautiful.

1000009974
 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Cristiano ronaldo
 1 year ago
How can you be a racist when you do not like the Portuguese? This shows that you are not only evil but dumb as well. Btw, talking about racism. Your country has a long history about that until the day of today.

 Reply
Human
 Reply to  Cristiano ronaldo
 1 year ago
Undoubtedly, the nature of Portugal is beautiful. But the subject of the comments is related to the Portuguese bipeds

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Cristiano ronaldo
 1 year ago
There is no beauty in Poortugal. None.
Just hate, infestation, dilapidation and envy. “Beauty is in the eye of the beholder”. Pigs like pig-sties.

 Reply
Human
 1 year ago
The only advice I can give to non-Portuguese is to never go to this swamp. The moral and social situation and consciousness of the Portuguese is much worse than you think. **Please take it seriously**

 Reply
Bob
 Reply to  Human
 1 year ago
I agree!
Imagine the worst hell you could ever imagine… x 100.
**WARNING! NEVER MOVE TO PORTUGAL**

 Reply
Pablo
 1 year ago
Franco-lebanese here. I agree, this is the worst country I have ever been in Europe, and I have never seen as many retards as in this country. I left to Vigo in Spain and I am faaaar happier.
To the Brasilians living in this shithole: you don’t owe them NOTHING, you are in YOUR country, never give up.

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Look, I am a portuguese citizen and I have to agree with everything of what you say. Maybe it is a bit based, but whatever. Now, hear this, I am a crook and I admit it, but it’s not because I want to be or because I think it’s the correct way to be, it’s because if I if I weren’t like this the others would take advantage of me! We are constantly attacking each other and thats the truth! For example, here in a small dispute it’s not about who are right and who are wrong, if one person is from an older generation he will automatically assume that he’s right and the other is retarded! Here there is neither right or wrong, lots of disputes are solved by fighting, punching and wathever. In an argument we’ll also argue till the end, and if one assumes guilt he is considered weak. Here we use to say that “guilt dies single”, so there it is. And I’m also very corrupt, because if I were not, I could not make anything in this country. I don’t mind pay bribes, it is just the rules of the game and if I want to play I have to follow the rules. We have an awfull unjust system and if we could solve things with cash, then go for it! I garantee you, if we change our way of thinking and being I would became a model citizen, like we see on developed societies! I think it’s every Portuguese’s dream! But I, like many others had our fair share of bad done to us and I don’t mind admiting that I also take some joy seeing my enemies suffer. I just have to controll myself to not let my own humanity and racionality die totally, but as we say here “when in Rome, do as the romans do”. I had a lot of foreign influences so this also seems a little surreal to me. Government spends billions making propaganda of something we have good, ok it’s their job, but because of that the real problems are disguised and taboo to talk about, so there it is. But I don’t think that’s gonna happen anytime soon. We’ll need a total cultural revolution to make that happen. I sometimes compare some of my foreign friends and we say, it’s like if you are italian and a businessman you will have to deal with the mafia sooner or later. Besides, we the latin countries (except maybe France) in this kind of culture are very similar but also looks like this is a specific thing of portuguese ethnicity and culture, because if you look at Brazil and talk with brazilians they will tell that in their homeland it is exactly the same thing or even worse. Cheers mate.

 Reply
Anony
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Thank you for your honesty. I’ve seen this happen to people who used to have good morals…and lost them in Poortugal.
I think it’s extremely sad that one has to become a corrupt barbarian in order to survive and not lose one’s sanity. I also struggled to see how perpetual corrupt barbarianism allows one to maintain their humanity.

 Reply
Anonymous44
 1 year ago
It’s hard to explain just how dehumanising and toxic this country is…

1000009880
 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
.

1000009823
 Reply
Marc
 1 year ago
Hi every one,
Are there any people who have been falsely accused in Portugal, false witnesses testifying against you and being convicted by a biased court/judge after an ufair trial where all your rights have been violated? In other words : total horror! I would like to get in touch with those people .

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Marc
 1 year ago
I believe there are many. Total horror is correct. I’m sorry to hear that 😢 Go to Portugal Propaganda on FB. You will find support groups for Portuguese crimes and corruption.

 Reply
Márcia
 1 year ago
“It is impossible to be happy in Portugal, because nobody is and nobody wants to see you happy. The Portuguese are much more concerned with making the lives of others miserable than focusing on the happiness and success of their own lives. (sickening!)”
My experience in Portugal and living with a Portuguese man (ex-husband) and his family was exactly like this.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Márcia
 1 year ago
I completely agree. If you’re smiling they will descend on you like vultures, break you down, humiliated you, degrade you and insult you so badly that the sea couldn’t wash you clean. All just so they feel better about themselves. Sickening is correct.

 Reply
Anónimo
 1 year ago
https://visao.pt/atualidade/sociedade/2024-05-17-caso-do-menino-nepales-de-9-anos-vitima-de-linchamento-numa-escola-de-lisboa-o-que-se-sabe-ate-ao-momento/

https://www.portugalresident.com/nepalese-child-attacked-by-classmates-in-lisbon/

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anónimo
 1 year ago
Adult barbarians raising their children the same. The kids will probably get a pat on the back, being “patriotic” for lynching a “foreign savages”. Very EU, very democratic.

 Reply
Stanley
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Neighbour tried to burn my house down after I did not allow him to steal from my house. This is so called passive aggression of some of the Portuguese.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anónimo
 1 year ago
Portuguese terrorism practiced by kids! Barbarians at heart!
Don’t believe the propaganda about a country of friendly people, a total lie! This is the hidden, sick human Portuguese nature coming to the surface, which is present in so many Portuguese.

So typical of this damned country, the school itself has covered it up and denied everything and it’s all going to be judicially dismissed! The video has also been removed from social media, go figure! It’s like this in Portugal for everything! Portugal really is a dictatorship, believe me for your own safety.

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Portugal established the transatlantic slave trade and was one of the last to continue reaping its profits – it was still using de-facto slave labour in its colonies in the 1960s. Portugal also traded in enslaved people. Often by force, and under the banner of Christian crusading missions.

Museums and tourism infrastructure all amount to a grandiose rendering of the country’s 15-17th century “discoveries” in Africa, Asia and the Americas, and a selective recollection of its 20th century colonial exploits.

Angola, amongst others, has suffered the most catastrophic loss of lives during the trade in enslaved people at the hands of the Portuguese. A mass grave was uncovered containing the remains of children and adults, some with their hands bound. Forensic archaeologists dated the deceased back to the 15th century, finding them to be of African descent. The remains have been kept in storage and barely mentioned since.

Portuguese Explorers have been noted to boast of their conquests. How they triumphantly slaughtered villages and as an act of dominance had shit in the mouths of the slain victims.

I agree with the author. They might have a genetic defect that lacks humanity and empathy.

A lot of countries colonised, but only the Portuguese took immense pleasure and pride in their inhumane degradation after death. A trait that is still prevalent today.

They actually enjoy hurting others. They enjoy destroying other people’s lives. They pride themselves in the misery of others. They laugh in the face of the suffering of others.

 Reply
Anoni
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
The Author has an article on this…
“Shit in the mouth”

1000009645
 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Author, I think it would be worth uploading the story in the Guardian newspaper about Hazel Behan. Her rape trial – the rape occured in the Algarve – is now being held in Germany. She describes how, after the rape, the GNR followed her. She stopped them and asked what they were doing. They said they had to follow her to prove she was a slut. The police also told her to go home as she would damage local tourism.

 Reply
Anony
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
I think it’s a disgrace on the part of Portugal that the German and British Authorities have to pursue a case, that the Portuguese were to lackadaisy to even attempt. Not to mention victim blaming.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Behavior so typical of Portugal, not least the chauvinist caveman cops. The way the whole Madeleine McCann case was managed in Portugal was a total ultra-inept sham. I’ve tried to look for truly in-depth information about this tragedy and the many failings committed by the authorities at the time, which may very well be related to the horrific rape of this lady, but like everything else in Portugal, pretty much everything (that matters to know and is inconvenient) is redacted or simply wiped out from the Portuguese media. There are virtually no in-depth and truthful reports on this case.

However, this short excerpt from The Guardian newspaper about Hazel Behan says it all about Portugal and the Portuguese in general. Society of revolting beasts!
———
“She later described her anger towards the Portuguese police who allegedly failed to take a proper statement from her and, when she had been called to the local police station, had tossed her clothes – some of which the attacker had cut off with a pair of scissors – across a desk at her. She described being repeatedly urged to leave the resort, and was regularly followed by plain-clothed policemen.

Confronting them one day with the question: “Why are you following me?” She described how two of them had answered: “We just want to see if you’re a slut.”

“They said it would be best if I just went home because something like this would ruin tourism in the area … my friends would lose their jobs,” she said.”
———

These poor Madeleine parents, not only had their little girl stolen from them in Portugal, but were also treated like monsters by the clownish authorities and the Portuguese population in general, to cover up their typically shitty Portuguese investigation. It’s just the tip of the iceberg!
Excerpt from the Independent newspaper:
———
“The Portuguese authorities would later attract criticism over their conduct in the crucial earliest hours of the investigation when the trail might still have been warm, accused of making rudimentary mistakes like failing to conduct a house-by-house search of every local residence or interview all of the other guests at the resort, acting slowly to erect roadblocks and potentially compromising forensic evidence at the crime scene.”
———

This was the brilliant snap conclusion of the Madeleine McCann case, pulled out of the hat (to put the matter to rest and not have to do any more work) by a Portuguese “inspector” at the time (by the way, accused of torture in other cases, but all have been dismissed by the courts!). Let’s accuse the victims, not to mention the fact that another Portuguese “inspector”, Gonçalo Amaral, published a book vilifying the McCann parents of anything and everything. How despicable! There are no words!
This is the Portuguese cave justice! You go to ask for help for a crime you’ve suffered, you immediately become the perpetrator and you’re also entitled to the publication of a book defaming you for horrible things, published by the Portuguese authorities themselves!
———
“Chief inspector Tavares de Almeida of the Policia Judiciaria in Portimao signed a nine-page report concluding that Madeleine McCann had died in their apartment as a result of an accident, that the tapas dinner and rota checks on the McCann children had been part of a planned cover-up, that the family’s friends had helped to mislead the police and that the McCanns had concealed the body and then faked an abduction. A public prosecutor subsequently applied for the confiscation of Kate McCann’s diary and Gerry McCann’s laptop plus the group’s phone records.”
———

It should also be noted that the rapist of at least two women in Portugal, as far as we know (not to mention that he may still have been Madeleine’s abductor, but that will never be known due to the abysmal incompetence of the Portuguese (clown) “authorities”), is on trial and has already been convicted in Germany for crimes committed in Portugal!!! Because in Portugal everything was shelved!!! What kind of a shithole country is this?! Run away as fast as you can, because it could happen to you!

https://www.theguardian.com/world/article/2024/may/15/woman-raped-at-knife-point-in-portugal…

https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/madeleine-mccann-update…

madeleine-mccann-algarve-portugal-goncalo-amaral
 Reply
Rita
 1 year ago
You cannot carry adult conversations with adults in Portugal, because in general, the Portuguese are extremely difficult people to engage in an intelligent and meaningful conversation with, since we hear so much drivel and stupidity that our brains just want to shut down to end the agony, or else we just have to resort to talking about silly things with them, which they seem to love. Portugal is also a very infantilized society. – THIS EXACTLY. Very well written articule. Being born and raised here i should know.

 Reply
Marcus Winters
 1 year ago
I just wonder if the country has always been like that along history or if something has interfered with its development.

Last edited 1 year ago by Marcus Winters
 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Marcus Winters
 1 year ago
Portugal has always had its dark times in history. What do you think about the time of the inquisition when they killed many jews, kicked them out and took their childeren and conficated their properties. Nowadays it is one of the poorest countries in the EU. But it wont change quickly if you see their mentality.

 Reply
T123
 1 year ago
Jealousy, wickedness, cowardice, fraud, backstabbing, betrayal, lies and most importantly arrogance are the characteristics of the Portuguese. They hate to hear criticism. I wasted three years of my life in that country, I didn’t even meet a normal person. Avoid Portugal wherever you are in the world

 Reply
Pedro Areias
 Reply to  T123
 1 year ago
Unfortunately, it’s partly true. Not everyone is the same.

 Reply
Anoni
 Reply to  T123
 1 year ago
I concur 100%

 Reply
Paulo Troncos
 1 year ago
Ah, you fiend of foul disdain, you’re as misguided as a compass in a whirlwind! Your contempt for Portugal is as shallow as a puddle in a drought, and your ignorance rivals the vastness of the ocean that kisses Portugal’s shores. You’re like a grumbling storm, all thunder and no substance, hurling insults like pebbles against the fortress of Portugal’s rich history and culture.

Your animosity toward Portugal is as laughable as a jester’s antics, for it reveals not the flaws of the land but the poverty of your own understanding. With the grace of a bull in a china shop, you trample upon the elegance of Portugal’s language, the splendor of its architecture, and the richness of its traditions.

Oh, you pitiful wretch! Your disdain for Portugal is but a reflection of your own inadequacies, a feeble attempt to mask your envy of a nation that shines brighter than a diamond in the sun. Your insults are as feeble as a mouse against a lion, for Portugal stands tall and proud, unyielding to the petty grievances of insignificant souls like yours.

vai po caralho ó morcão de merda volta pa puta dos states ou o caralho que é o buraco de onde a puta da tua mãe de pariu caralhos te fodam

 Reply
AnonymousWoman
 Reply to  Paulo Troncos
 1 year ago
The only reason Portugal is not bankrupt is because of foreign investment and EU funding.
You have obviously also received the Portuguese education of “we are great, we are the best”… with the redaction of actual history. Portuguese are the inventors of slavery. Portuguese people committed genocide multiple times, and buried the evidence. War crimes, atrocities, modern-day corruption, fraud and slave-labour, all squashed by the Portuguese media.

It’s narcissism 101, manipulation, brainwashing and a false sense of security.

You say: “a nation that shines brighter than a diamond in the sun”…
Yet you have a higher number of child abuse than America (a country 107 times larger than Portugal). You have the second largest amount of mentally institutionalised people in Europe (2nd only because all cases are not documented). Depression is rife, hatred is a way of life and morals are non-existing.

Your country sucks!…and that’s an understatement.
But more importantly, it destroys the lives of good, hardworking, honest people.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Paulo Troncos
 1 year ago
I can fully understand the blog author. The Portuguese are depressing, vicious and toxic people ( beside the good once , which are the minority ). I lived in your evil country. The Portuguese are rough, not friendly, corrupted like hell, the lie are envyies. Their food is primitive and simple. The villages are poor, the roads are bad, the medical care is bad ( public ). Disorganised. You treat your animals bad. What do you think ?? Why should we love your people ??

 Reply
Read between the lines
 1 year ago
Another VERY diplomatic way of trying to WARN foreigners NOT to fall for the fake propaganda portraying Portugal as a great place to live.

https://youtu.be/_-i6WIUJKg4?si=9hzYC6kZ0BY8zKpP

1000008522
 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Read between the lines
 1 year ago
Excellent information for all foreigners, besides the Americans in the video!
In addition to the problems pointed out in the video, which are very pertinent, Portugal is a country with even deeper and much more dangerous problems (i.e. lack of real democracy due to total systemic corruption, no real citizen’s rights, and a endemically fraudulent justice system, which I point out throughout this site), and which are not perceptible because they are very well concealed by the Portuguese state and government, and also, with the general connivance of a sleepy population that doesn’t give a flying fig about anything but their football/soccer club and favorite soap opera.

Another thing that also seems glaringly obvious to me is that the Portuguese mentality clashes brutally head-on with the American mentality (or, for that matter, any other!). Portuguese citizens are in general, and very briefly; very passive citizens, not at all entrepreneurial, cheaters and they envy successful people tremendously, the exact opposite of the entrepreneurial, dynamic, pragmatic and very focused mentality of US citizens in general.

 Reply
Read between the lines
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Yes, I couldn’t agree with you more.
I think the reason most people choose to go “the very diplomatic” route, is because of the extremely vicious backlash and violent threats that will be received from PoortugalScum.
PoortugalScum are very very dangerous because of their lack of morals and integrity. They are very very vindictive, and will dedicate their lives to destroy someone else’s life. I think a lot of people are trying to get the message out, but trying to avoid life-threatening repercussions and cyber-abuse by the hands of the PoortugalScum.

 Reply
C.M.
 1 year ago
Corruption in Portugal

You are right in almost everything you describe. As a Portuguese citizen I was compeled to exit the country when I earned my degree and got the conditions to start life elsewhere.
If you want to know my opinion the worst cancer of what you describe is the municipality of Gondomar and the latest presidents were a real disaster in terms of corruption and personal interests. But its not only the presidents the other “vereadores” and the urban “planning” technicians are all a web of corruption and dark money schemes.
You can check for instance the scandal of the Hotel in Ribeira de Abade in Gondomar near the famous Douro river where there is signs of corruption everywhere you look, and only was stopped because a bunch of local citizens arised and called the press and made formal sustained complaints against the constrution:
https://www.jn.pt/i/13794927.html/ministerio-publico-entra-com-acao-para-impugnar-hotel-em-gondomar-14581325.html/amp/

More recently a Burguer King was built in S. Cosme – Gondomar – on top of an existing street, making necessary a deviation on the trace of the street, but the main infrastructures like energy, telecomunications, rain waters, etc all still pass under the Burguer King building.
They also built a few years ago a McDonalds with part of it on top of the safe zone of the IC29/A43 highway, all with the municipality and the president knowledge.
If you are a private business trying to make simple things in Gondomar like an area correction of a land you wait almost 6 months to a year (Registo Predial in Gondomar is one of the worst in the country). Also if you bring international investment to Gondomar and need a license to build a Supermarket, a restaurant or any kind of private investment you have to give money to the right persons (normally the president or someone related) on the municipality to be able to get the license, or else you will wait eternity or get your ideal blocked by minor reasons that will tire you and make you give up.
Gondomar is a pond that thrives to very few and demolishes all others. But this are only small examples of someone that now lives abroad gets to know, there must be many more and even worst situations that should be known to the world so that Portugal will be a better country for coming generations!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  C.M.
 1 year ago
This is how it works in practically all of Portugal, from small power to big power. Very good for a very few, and very bad for the rest of the population (and foreigners). Never come to Portugal, let alone bring your money! Portugal is, for all intents and purposes, a dictatorship of criminals serving other criminals! Make no mistake, in this case, as in everything in Portugal, justice will do nothing to the perpetrators at the end of the “investigations”, which will be filed away! It’s all a pretense! Thank you for your comment.

 Reply
Anonymous99
 1 year ago
After reading all the comments on this blog, I’ve noticed that a lot of Portuguese people who are offended by this blog responds with “it’s JUST the justice system” that is very bad…. everything else is good.
How can a country be “good” when there is NO law?
How can anybody make an honest living when criminals are in power?
How can there be any form of reconciliation when the primary problem is just being brushed off as “JUST the Judicial system”
Do Portuguese people not understand the vital importance of law and order?
Why are Portuguese people not protesting down the streets on a daily basis, demanding an honest and effective legal system?
All foreigners are getting screwed, but good hardworking Portuguese people are getting screwed too!
Good Portuguese should take advantage of being part of the EU (while it lasts) and scream from the top of their lungs that they are fed up with criminals getting away with “murder”, lives being destroyed, the economy being F’ed…etc. Specifically, because of a failing legal system.
Lawyers should be held at a higher regard. Lawyers who commit crimes should not be allowed to continue practicing law, and should spend time in jail for their criminal acts. Yet…none of this happens, WHY NOT?
It’s only logic.
Judges who are prejudice and crooked, should be held responsible! And the punishment should be more severe, because they have sworn an oath to uphold the law. Disbarred and prison time.
It seems to me like the best place for a criminal, is to become a lawyer or a judge in Portugal.
In other countries, people who are least trustworthy and highly deceptive (even when they are a lawyer or a judge) are called outlaws and criminals. Yet in Portugal they receive honour. Solely focussed on the title in stead of judging them by their actions.
It is beyond me WHY corrupt lawyers and judges are allowed to continue practicing!
How, in God’s name, is the system allowing it?
LAWYERS ARE CORRUPT,
JUDGES ARE CORRUPT,
THEREFORE THE “SYSTEM” IS FAILING!

And the response you get…. “Oh, it’s JUST the Judicial system” 🤯 otherwise Portugal is great! …I mean, are you in denial? Do you think if you just close your eyes and repeat “Portugal is great, Portugal is great” that everything will be okay?

A country without law and order…is a favela! (Slum)
Your country will never improve nor recover, unless the good Portuguese STAND UP FOR JUSTICE!
NO JUSTICE, NO PEACE, NO EVOLUTION!

Result… everyone (of good intent) will leave the country, if the majority of Portuguese JUST IGNORE the problem of identifying the true problem AND STAY SILENT about eradicating CRIMINALS IN POWER!

YOU NEED MUCH MUCH HARSHER PUNISHMENTS FOR PEOPLE IN POWER WHO ABUSES THEIR POWER!

 Reply
4Opinionz
 Reply to  Anonymous99
 1 year ago
The system stinks because those who runs it are Portuguese.

Last edited 1 year ago by 4Opinionz
 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Anonymous99
 1 year ago
You’re absolutely right, but the Portuguese are passive and fatalistic. It will never change. It is their mentality.

 Reply
Carlos Fontes
 1 year ago
As a native Portuguese I confirm everything I have read in this blog.

I’m 28 yo and I was born in Portugal and I live this hell today, I see me in every word I read in this blog, Portuguese is one of the most broken societies you will ever meet, all of my life I been Suffering as I try to be honest among the “portugueses”.
I was betrayed and played by everyone else incluiding my own family!
There so many problems I would like to tell you about Portugal, very creepy facts about this shit hole country! Even the schools and professors are really envious people it’s just insane!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Carlos Fontes
 1 year ago
Hi Carlos,
I understand your words deeply! I just wish you a lot of strength and that you manage to get out of that hellhole. Portuguese society doesn’t deserve people like you! The toxicity of the Portuguese, in its vast majority, will eat you to the bone if you don’t leave Portugal! You’re very young and I’m sure you have a wonderful future ahead of you 🙂 Best of luck!

 Reply
Carlos Fontes
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Me and my wife we are already planing to move to , Switzerland or other country.
It’s really crazy man, as Portuguese I can tell you that even in school the “crookism” is approved, as if you are a student and honest, the teacher will ask you “why u didn’t copy the exam? The student by your side was approved”.
My father try all of his life run a honest construction company, 3 times bankrupt by strange “accidents”.
I work for a fake renewable electric generation company, that say it’s green but it’s not… it generates electricity in fact, by burning “biomass”, runned by a free mason. My salary is an average salary in Portugal as an electromechanic.
Thank you for your commitment to writing the blog, and for your words, may the creator be with you 😁

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Carlos Fontes
 1 year ago
I’m so happy for you! 🙂 One less family to be destroyed in Poortugal!

 Reply
Joao dantas
 1 year ago
if Portugal its so bad as you say…
9 years to get back to other country?

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Joao dantas
 1 year ago
Portugal, the second poorest country in the EU. Portugal, highest depression rate. Corrupted, no sense of humor. Food is rough and simple famers kitchen, not refined. Just like the people, not refined. Viscious, toxic, evil, envious people. Very bad organised and unreliable people. Not a nice culture in the far corner of Europe.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Joao dantas
 1 year ago
How unintelligent can one be?! Do you realize that I spent six years stuck in Poortugal fighting (all in vain) to recover my stolen money in your thoroughly corrupt courts, and that I only found out much later that the crook who stole from me had already been doing it for at least three years before me, with dozens and dozens of cases being consecutively dismissed by your corrupt judges worth more than at least five million euros (that I know of!), because they were certainly receiving fat rewards in envelopes under the table all these years, but I’ll never know that because your judges don’t investigate their other fellow judges, right!

 Reply
Miriam
 1 year ago
Hello! I am a Portuguese and I agree 100% with this article! Finally someone said the truth. After all I am not alone in my opinion. Maybe because my ancestors were from Ireland and Germany, but I always felt that I didn’t fit in this Portuguese mentality.
Thank tou so much!

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Miriam
 1 year ago
I am fighting a family, well connected and well off. Every court case I lose. I am a foreigner, not Portuguse. Then you ‘re already 10 points behind. Well connected family another 10 points behind. Corruption in the judicial system another 50 points. They make themself hated by foreigners. Read this link https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corruption_in_Portugal and you ‘ll undertstand. We should all stand up, be united and tell all our horror stories to the media. This has to stop !

 Reply
Read between the lines
 1 year ago
10 REASONS NOT TO MOVE TO PORTUGAL

This video is very diplomatic and factual.

https://youtu.be/eujFUKxzKqg?si=S5XLUk4H4c4XpZE9

1000008519
 Reply
PREPARE YOURSELF NO MERCY
 1 year ago
Prepare for the hack of your life!!!!
You’re about to face the consequences of your actions. Your family, your secrets, your entire life is about to be laid bare by a group of hackers you’ve angered. There’ll be no mercy, no hiding. Get ready to be exposed to the world.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  PREPARE YOURSELF NO MERCY
 1 year ago
I think the EU should start up a Pexit. Kick Portugal out. hey get a lot of money and they are corrupt like no other. Let them be poor and passive. Let them complain. Thats what they like.

 Reply
Anon82
 Reply to  Jens
 1 year ago
I agree…PEXIT (lol)

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anon82
 1 year ago
PORXIT

 Reply
A co*a da tua mae. Seu filho da puta
 1 year ago
You’ll regret it, you big coward, get ready, when you’re found out even your whore of a wife eats ants!
YOU BIG SON OF A BITCH, YOU COWARD WHO HIDES LIKE A SCARED CHILD. COME OUT, YOU HERO, COME OUT!

Nickname translation:
Your mother’s c*nt. You son of a bitch

Original Portuguese text:
Vais te arrepender seu grande covarde, prpara-te, quando fores descoberto até a puta da tua mulher come formigas
SEU GRANDE FILHO DA PUTA, COVARDE QUE SE ESCONDE COMO UMA CRIANÇA CHEIA DE MEDO. APARECE SEU HEROI, VEM LÁ APARECER

 Reply
Dr. Fonseca Galhão
 1 year ago
“Meet an asshole in the morning, you’ve just met an asshole. Meet assholes all day, you’re the asshole.”

 Reply
Dr. Seuss
 Reply to  Dr. Fonseca Galhão
 1 year ago
…

1000008523
 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Dr. Seuss
 1 year ago
Touché!! 😀👍

 Reply
Mario
 1 year ago
I’m Portuguese and fortunately 7 years ago I left that place and went to Germany. I never identified with the distorted, retarded, primitive mentality of the Portuguese. I agree with everything on this blog, and I love seeing many Portuguese foam at the mouth with anger that this blog exists. BE CAREFUL: don’t trust anyone for anything in Portugal, behind every smile, there is someone who will catch you at the moment you are happiest and will end your life. As the author of the blog said “in Portugal something wrong is never resolved, it will always get worse”. If you are in Poortugal the only plan you should have is an escape plan, before it is too late. I have 2 nephews aged 21 and 23 who also went to work in Amsterdam in 2022, today they have a stable and happy life. They had a miserable life in Poortugal and always lived at their parents’ house.

 Reply
xica
 Reply to  Mario
 1 year ago
You’re all a bunch of nutters sucking foreigners’ asses hahaha!

Original Portuguese text:
vocês não batem bem da cabeça a chupar o cu aos estrangeiros hahaha

 Reply
M. Sousa
 1 year ago
Narcissism, mediocrity, envy are abundant in Portugal unfortunately. I’m Portuguese btw.

 Reply
Anonymous2
 1 year ago
Abandon all hope ye who enters here

1000008500
 Reply
Shay
 1 year ago
The Lisbon Genocide
It’s a short film
It has been left out of school curriculums, out of history.
Let’s just pretend bad things don’t happen and Portuguese people are so nice, and it’s so safe. If we keep on telling everyone how great we are, they must believe it, right?

It’s a complete mob-mentality. One guy points a finger at “the foreigner” and then all the rest jump on him like a pack of rabies infested wild dogs.
One woman says “it’s a miracle” and they all believe blindly without question. When one guy points out logic, again they attack him like a pack of rabies infested wild dogs.
This mob-mentality is still prevalent today.

And it’s okay, because they’re Catholic, so “In the name of Jesus Christ, you are absolved from all your sins”, right?

https://youtu.be/brfOY4-KQ1k?si=F5Adg3oL3yT4epYE

1000008497
 Reply
Your Ass
 1 year ago
You are a big mother fucker! No one invited you. Up yours. Fuck off. You are a piece of shit.

Portugal, the best place to live and one of the oldest countries of Europe. Go black to tour shit hole.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Your Ass
 1 year ago
Portugal, the best place to live. The 2nd poorest country in the EU. They get billions from Brussels. Corruption is part of life. No sense of humor. Shall I go on ?

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Your Ass
 1 year ago
Um… actually YOUR GOVERNMENT is inviting foreigners to come!!! Because the educated Portuguese people are ESCAPING uneducated Portuguese like you!!!

Hum… na verdade o VOSSO GOVERNO está a convidar os estrangeiros a virem!!! Porque os portugueses instruídos estão a FUGIR dos portugueses sem instrução como tu!!!

 Reply
Anonymous100
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Yeah!
Look at this link:
https://www.pt2030.org/portugal-2030-who-can-apply

The Government is actively trying to LURE unsuspecting investors into the country.
Not to mention their student packages that they LURE unsuspecting students.

These are all funding received from the EU to improve the economic situation…
Yet it’s just another way the country is scamming the EU. Companies that have no other interest than relieving the investor or their money. Funds that are used to entrap even more investors. Investors that will ultimately face a major loss.

It’s all a scam.

 Reply
Tua tia
 1 year ago
Cry more you nazi fuck lmao

 Reply
Observer
 1 year ago
“IT HAPPENS EVERY DAY” – 10 people’s accounts of discrimination in Portugal.

For those of you enticed by the false portrayal of “the friendly Portuguese people and a peaceful life”, BE WARNED.
IT’S A DEHUMANIZING TRAP.

https://youtu.be/JIjIs9sTk_Y?si=O35QPw5mswDYnnrU

1000008489
 Reply
UOL Prime
 1 year ago
Brazilians decide to return to Brazil after mistreatment, discrimination, violence and abuse of children in Portuguese schools.

* Teachers hittings kids over the head with metal ruler and pulling them by their ears because they speak with an accent.
* Teachers calling children niggers, monkeys and shit. Justifying that it’s not racist because there are white monkeys too.
* Student arrested by police from school for denouncing abuse.

Mother;
“I’m a foreigner, I have a different culture, and I’m very scared here”

Other mother;
“I could see the sparkle in my child disappear over time. We decided to return to Brazil to offer my child a more humane and spiritual education without violence.”

https://youtu.be/gYvbUpVLyC0?si=fjAgTDex1mdIuiSy

1000008486
 Reply
UOL Prime
 1 year ago
https://youtu.be/T-0jXff3_l8?si=ae7obfEqvxhc4ZnC

Look at this Extreme Xenophobia in Portugal 🤮
People getting brutally attacked, verbally accosted and discriminated against.

Very very barbaric and uncivilised.
A stark contrast to all the propaganda out there portraying Portugal as a wonderful and safe place with friendly people.

1000008483
 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  UOL Prime
 1 year ago
I’m not Brazilian, but I have also been physically attacked, verbally attacked (daily) and denied service and work, because I speak Portuguese with an accent. It is really really horrible to live here as a foreigner 🤢

 Reply
Tua Mãe
 1 year ago
Fuck you ox, you’re a big son of a bitch and you should be raped by 30 niggers you cunt, go eat shit for your country you dumb, stupid fucking prick!

Original Portuguese text:
Vai te foder oh boi, és um grande filho da puta e devias ser violado por 30 pretos seu cabrao, vai comer merda pro teu país seu burro, otario do caralho

 Reply
João Zarco
 Reply to  Tua Mãe
 1 year ago
And here we have an example of a Portuguese with no education.

Original Portuguese text:
E aqui temos um exemplo de um português sem instrução, nem educação.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Tua Mãe
 1 year ago
Very educated people as well in Portugal and civilized.

 Reply
Pipo Macaco
 Reply to  Tua Mãe
 1 year ago
I think you are proving the author right.

Original Portuguese text:
Acho que estás a provar ao autor que ele tem razão …

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Tua Mãe
 1 year ago
… just another daily interaction
in Portugal …

 Reply
ExpatUmeanImmigrant
 1 year ago
We do have issues with justice but the rest of your drivel is so ignorant, insufferable, racist and classicist (not to say outright lies) that I wish you were scammed more, you deserve everything bad coming to you

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  ExpatUmeanImmigrant
 1 year ago
Portuguese are racists. They are the founders of it. And a lot more bad things, like; ignorant, vicious, toxic, evil, primitive, uneducated and so on and so on….. It is my own experience. And thet treat their pets horrbile.

 Reply
Isabel
 Reply to  ExpatUmeanImmigrant
 1 year ago
Expat U mean Immigrant,
Portugal is the country with the highest emigration rate in Europe and one of the highest in the world. The peak of emigration occurred between 2010 and 2019. In total, there are around 2.3 million Portuguese immigrants living abroad (first generation), of which 70% are between 15 and 39 years old.
Jan 12, 2024

https://www.theportugalnews.com/news/2024-01-12/30-of-young-portuguese-leave-the-country/85048#:~:text=Portugal%20is%20the%20country%20with,15%20and%2039%20years%20old.

BLAMING, DENIAL, SPEWING HATE AT THOSE ADDRESSING THE BLATANT ISSUES,
SIMPLY WON’T HELP YOU.
YOUR OWN PEOPLE ARE RUNNING AWAY FROM YOUR COUNTRY.

 Reply
Salvador
 1 year ago
Dear author,

Your diatribe against an entire nation reeks of ignorance, arrogance, and cowardice. It takes a special kind of spinelessness to sit behind a keyboard and hurl insults at a people you know nothing about, all while hiding behind a veil of anonymity.

Your contempt for Portugal and its people is matched only by your own lack of integrity and intelligence. You have the audacity to label an entire population as stupid, yet it was your own dim-witted decision to immigrate to a country you clearly despise without bothering to learn anything about it beforehand.

If your homeland is truly the utopia you make it out to be, then why did you bother coming to Portugal in the first place? Your presence here serves as a constant reminder of your own hypocrisy and inadequacy.

It’s time for you to grow a backbone and confront the ugliness that lies within. Your venomous words do nothing but expose your own bitterness and resentment. Until you can muster the courage to engage with the world like a grown adult instead of a petulant child, you will continue to be nothing more than a pathetic and contemptible figure, unworthy of anyone’s attention.

Sincerely,
Salvador.

 Reply
Jen
 Reply to  Salvador
 1 year ago
Hi Salvador,

Do you understand the difference between;
• describing a horrific life changing experience by the hands of your captor
and
• dishing out profanities without walking a mile in their shoes?

 Reply
PoortugueseMasterBaiter
 1 year ago
Hello, chief! I haven’t read it, but here in the country we tell those who don’t like it here to fuck off!

Original Portuguese text:
Olá chefe! Não li, mas aqui na terrinha dizemos para aqueles que não gostam daqui para irem para o caralho!

 Reply
Tiago
 Reply to  PoortugueseMasterBaiter
 1 year ago
Dear PortugueseMasturbator,
I’m Portuguese, and I feel ashamed to read your comment.
It really isn’t acceptable to speak like a pirate anymore.

Caro MasturbadorPortuguês,
Sou português e sinto-me envergonhado por ler o seu comentário.
De facto, já não é aceitável falar como um pirata.

 Reply
Costa200
 1 year ago
This cunt came here, not knowing the system, things don’t go well… Must be the whole country, right? Sure!

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Costa200
 1 year ago
It is the most horrible country where I have been, out of 33. Portuguese are indeed horrible by many aspects. They do not have one nice characteristics
Obrigado !

 Reply
Xin
 Reply to  Costa200
 1 year ago
I agree with the author. He’s right.
95% of Portuguese are tremendously corrupt, arrogant, ignorant and narcissistic.

The more educated young Portuguese are fleeing the country like mice from a burning ship.

Thank you for your insightful response Costa200.

 Reply
MacReady
 1 year ago
“As armas e os barões assinalados,
Que da ocidental praia Lusitana,
Por mares nunca de antes navegados,
Passaram ainda além da Taprobana,
Em perigos e guerras esforçados,
Mais do que prometia a força humana,
E entre gente remota edificaram
Novo Reino, que tanto sublimaram;

E também as memórias gloriosas
Daqueles Reis, que foram dilatando
A Fé, o Império, e as terras viciosas
De África e de Ásia andaram devastando;
E aqueles, que por obras valerosas
Se vão da lei da morte libertando;
Cantando espalharei por toda parte,
Se a tanto me ajudar o engenho e arte.”

Luís Vaz de Camões. “Os Lusíadas” Canto I

How evil do you have to be to create a website that encourages mockery and hatred of a nation and people?

An exercise in slanderous, ignorant and hateful cheap speech that should make the author blush with shame if he had any shred of ethical and moral principles and values.

The noble and secular Portuguese nation, once the world’s largest empire, is far above the braying of ignorant beasts who do not even touch its glory and grandeur.

Like all countries, we are not perfect and we have our problems, mainly thanks to the miserable and corrupt governance of left-wing and far-left parties, but taking a small part of bandits and traitors and making these imbecile generalizations is revealing of embarrassing stupidity.

Learn a little about the History of Portugal before embarassing yourself making pathetic figures worthy of pity.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  MacReady
 1 year ago
‘The noble and secular Portuguese nation, once the world’s largest empire, is far above the braying of ignorant beasts who do not even touch its glory and grandeur.’

Hahahahahaha. I am dead from laughter. The 2nd poorest memberstate of the EU. Without their money, you will dissapear into the ocean!

 Reply
Leo
 Reply to  MacReady
 1 year ago
The author is a hero. When the Portuguese would have 1 percent of his courage to speak out, the country would change. But the Portuguese rather stay what they are: passive, fatalistique, complaining, poor, not refined and very rude. Oh, I forgot one: corrupt!

 Reply
Ben
 Reply to  MacReady
 1 year ago
Personally I have gone through really really really horrific years in Portugal, from which I will be scared and damaged for life. It was not only because of the “left wing” parties.
It was because of the Portuguese people; colleagues, bosses, the people working in the bank, the check out staff at the supermarkets, the dentists, the accountants, the doctors, the government employees, waiters, neighbours, lawyers and even strangers.

You write:
“The noble and secular Portuguese nation, once the world’s largest empire, is far above the braying of ignorant beasts who do not even touch its glory and grandeur.”
…
I mean… delusional? High?

It’s 2024!
Not 1424!

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Ben
 1 year ago
I can understand what you mean. I first thought, I have bad luck with the people in PT, like the bankers, doctors, lawyers, the dentists, the shopkeeper, the waiters etc. Etc. But no, it is a whole nation!

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Ben
 1 year ago
I’ve lived in other 3rd world countries…
Portugal is a 5th world country!!!

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Lol, like don’t insult the 3rd world countries out there by comparing them to this shit hole 😅

 Reply
anon
 1 year ago
This is the most outrageously racist and xenophobic blog I’ve read in a while and it says more about yourself than anything else.
Not even the most petty, jealous, small minded portuguese that you so passionately hate would come up with something like this.
Not even the most racist dumbfuck would make the remarks you’ve done here, using African countries as an insult, calling for “defective genetics” (quite primitive and unscholar of you) and that’s quite the achievement.
I hope you don’t have kids, no one should be raised be someone with this kind of hate inside them.
And I’m pretty sure you’ll be scammed again wherever you live, you sound like an ideal target.

 Reply
Avril
 Reply to  anon
 1 year ago
Well, half of Poortugal doesn’t know how emails work…so I doubt they will be able to compile a blog. And the educated and civilised Portuguese don’t throw a fit when confronted with the reality.
I see a lot of hate inside of you… do you have kids?

 Reply
Leo
 Reply to  anon
 1 year ago
The author of this blog is a hero. Portugal has been the worst nightmere in my entire life. The courts are biased, corrupted, people unreliable, passive, lazy, impolite and no sense of humor. Do I need to say more ?

 Reply
John
 Reply to  anon
 1 year ago
I have gone through a very similar hell as the author. Every sentence he wrote, rings exceptionally true to me.
It is not xenophobia when you describe how you have been physically, psychologically and financially TORTURED by a particular culture.
All good people will be able to empathise with his story, even if they don’t agree with every point.
After all, he didn’t write this blog to discriminate, he wrote this blog out of the injustices and the incomprehensibly inhumane treatment that they had faced in Portugal, in an attempt to save others from the same torturous hell.

I applaud his courage.

 Reply
Chupameapissa
 Reply to  John
 1 year ago
Author’s note: I only allowed this creep’s response below, so readers know what awaits them in Portugal!

No one called you here, no one wants you here.
We have contempt for you rancid foreigners, just because the scum socialists wanted you here does not reflect the vast majority of the population.

It warms my heart to see you get fu**ed and years of your life wasted. Keep sharing your stories i will keep laughing from the sideline.

Last edited 1 year ago by Chupameapissa
 Reply
Rui
 1 year ago
I honestly don’t know how could you had such a bad experience. Even worse, you had the patience to create a website around that. I’m Portuguese, I’ve lived here all my life and lived abroad for some time as well. Apart from the Northern Europe where people are usually more correct, focused and with a nice(r?) mentality, all the world has these problems. Brasil? Check. USA? Check. Southern Europe? Check. I mean… It’s a crazy world in 2024 and the problems are, quite honestly, so common everywhere that I can’t understand how could you hate this country that much. I understand where you come from and I acknowledge some of your points, but they are so so so common around the world. Do you feel happier trashing a country like this? I don’t get it.

 Reply
Reis
 1 year ago
Cry a little more 🤣🤣🤣🤣❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹❤️🇵🇹

 Reply
Inês
 Reply to  Reis
 1 year ago
Kings (ironic)
Lack of empathy, integrity, basic morals and delusions of grandeur = Severe personality disorder and acute narcissism.

 Reply
Márcia
 Reply to  Reis
 1 year ago
This blog describes exactly creatures like you.

 Reply
Leo
 1 year ago
Hi, I hope your blog will grow and grow and grow. I have never seen a more vicious and toxic culture/ behaviour then I saw in Portugal. What a horrible people. I feel sorry for the good ones. But I am sure they are in the minority.

 Reply
anonymous47
 1 year ago
Before leaving Portugal, over a year ago, I was talking to a French man, who was robbed by a Portuguese, and who lost most of his money. He tried going through the courts, but wasn’t able to recover any of his money. He just ended up losing even more money on a crooked lawyer…. A familiar story…

After explaining how it happened, he said this to me at the end of our conversation:

“If I had but one bullet and were faced by both an enemy and a portuguese, I would let the portuguese have it.”

I was impressed by this, because the way he said it, I knew he was completely serious. And since talking to the French man, I’ve learned that he was paraphrasing a famous quote by a Romanian named Corneliu Zelea Codreanu, which goes like this: “If I had but one bullet and were faced by both an enemy and a traitor, I would let the traitor have it.”

So it’s obvious the French man I spoke to was thinking of the Portuguese as traitors, the kind of traitors who smile to your face, while stabbing you in the back

Although he was leaving Portugal, I had a feeling that for him, the story wasn’t over and he would be back one day, and as I told him good-bye I thought to myself, maybe I will read about him one day in the newspapers, although I don’t even know his name

 Reply
anonymous47
 1 year ago
Look at this Portuguese bitch (in the 40 sec video below), insulting and screaming at a Brazilian woman, for the “crime” of speaking Portuguese with a Brazilian accent, even though the Brazilian did not even live in Portugal. She was just passing through (at the airport!) on her way home to Barcelona, where she lives and where she said no one had ever insulted her or spoken to her like this, in all the time she’s lived in Barcelona, but all it took was a few days in Portugal

And you may ask yourself, how many Portuguese are exactly the same (in the way they think about Brazilians and all foreigners) as this disgusting bitch, but maybe not quite so obvious, and maybe a little better at hiding it?

If you answered almost all of them, you got that right, and this means you’ve spent enough time living in Portugal, among Portuguese people, that you’ve seen their true ugly face, and it resembles the face of the woman below:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l8S9cc-p4NQ

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  anonymous47
 1 year ago
Such an ugly person, inside and out! (Foreigners are always to blame for all the ills in Portugal (even when they don’t even live in Portugal, the ridiculous!), but never themselves.)
This is what exists most in Portugal (even if disguised and contained, quite right, the Portuguese never show their true colors at first sight). And the big problem is that these are the monsters who take on any role in Portuguese society, when a person needs it most, right up to the most critical ones such as politics, public services and the judiciary (everything!). Imagine your life depending on such a creature, in a court or in the health sector for example? Which is what happens all the time to your life in Portugal. It’s the rule, not the exception.

Thank you so much for this video. This is the real Portugal concentrated in 40 seconds!

 Reply
Chupameapissa
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
I love to see rancid foreigners get what they deserve, no one invited you, nobody wants you near.
 
You have to be delusional to stay around.
 
Honestly get fucked! Ahahahahah

 Reply
Sally
 Reply to  Chupameapissa
 1 year ago
Hi SuckMyDick,
Thank you for exhibiting such an exquisite display of charm.

To anyone even thinking about coming to Portugal…this is but a small taste of how the majority of people in Portugal talk when they don’t get what they want.

 Reply
Stanley
 Reply to  Sally
 1 year ago
Some of them just say: “I’ll kill you…” when you stop them from stealing stuff from you.

 Reply
Chupameapissa
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Love to see you cry

Last edited 1 year ago by Chupameapissa
 Reply
anonymous47
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
That’s a good point, imagine your life depending on such a creature, and if a foreigner stays long enough in Portugal one day, it will. A truly frightening thought!

I already left Portugal, over a year ago, however someone I care about is still there, and I’m trying to help them get out, before it’s too late

And yes, that video above sums it up, and it should be called “Understand the real Portugal in 40 seconds”

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Today, 25th of April, the people celebrating 50 years of liberty are the same who strip you of your right to have it.
This, ladies and gentlemen, is Portugal.

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Hi there,
Unfortunately and as a Portuguese citizen, I subscribe your words.

Portugal is a place with no law and where the crime and corruption became part of the society and in my words it’s becoming even worse.
This country has a reputation for being “safe” and “pleasurable” to live just because of tourism. Now for those who live here the reality is incredibly different.
The Portuguese personality in general it’s disgusting. They don’t like to see you happy and having a nice lifestyle, because they’re jealous as hell. As a Portuguese I don’t trust in most of the people as well, because when with you they can look to be nice people, but as soon as you leave they’ll judge, criticise and make your life a hell.
Even within my extended family, I’ve experienced it, so I’m Portuguese, but I hate the Portuguese people and being from this miserable country.

I left Portugal 1 month ago and obviously life is not easy it doesn’t matter the place, but I don’t feel like coming back to that country again. I don’t even feel homesick about it.

For the people who are looking forward to come to Portugal, I just tell you to think well about this move.

Portugal used to be better and nowadays the immigration as many other topics has no rules and isn’t being managed at all. Everyone can enter this country, and the immigration doesn’t care if they have sufficient funds to provide for themselves, if they have work and accommodation, so after all, the honest people are the ones who have to give their money to provide to those people and to the thilthy thieves in the government who will try to steal every cent they can.

I wish my country had never existed. As a Portuguese I’m really disappointed and upset with it.

 Reply
Vasco
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Its true! I am portuguese and this country is a SHITHOLE!!

 Reply
Simon
 1 year ago
I found this blog at the right time. I was robbed when I decided to buy a car in Portugal. I was left without my money and without the car and I was manipulated by the thieves. I’m going to sell my house in Cascais, I’ve already made my decision, thank you for this blog. I’d rather forget what money I’ve lost, but being away from this country is infinitely better.

 Reply
Stanley
 Reply to  Simon
 1 year ago
Years ago I bought a car from a dealership in Portugal. Weeks later I realized it had a hidden issue that is hard and expensive to repair. I found out that under Portuguese law it was under 2 year warranty, so I went to the dealership and asked them to repair it. They asked me to wait for a couple month. I waited. Then after nothing I went t the dealership again. They took my car and gave me a complete junk car to drive around that was dying every 5 minutes and was hard to restart. After a month hearing nothing from the dealership and seeing them driving my car to work etc. I went there again and they returned my car, but with an almost empty tank of petrol. I gave it to them with almost a full tank. They gave me some fake document of repair which showed a date of repair being done BEFORE a date of purchase of the car by me. Fraudsters! The car was not repaired and they used up the petrol in the tank and drove almost 1000 km with it. I got many stories like this living in Portugal. I can’t afford to move. I have learned how to deal with problems living in Portugal, but many poroblems are so overwhelming.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Simon
 1 year ago
I’m so sorry about what happened to you, it’s everyday life for people living in Portugal, where crime is legal, protected and nurtured by the criminal and dictatorial Portuguese State and shamelessly executed in broad daylight. Best decision you could have made. I wish you every success outside Portugal.

Portugal is an extremely dangerous country, which unfortunately people can’t even imagine how dangerous it is because of the propaganda and connivance of the Portuguese population. I just want people to realize that Portugal is (in practice) a dictatorship of criminals. Believe me! Because it is the truth! Run away from Portugal and never set foot there!

 Reply
Anónima
 1 year ago
Alert for women

If you are a woman in Portugal, you have to be doubly careful: your life is worth nothing in that country. The Portuguese police do not care about solving crimes against women, and if you are a foreigner, even less. In other words, they don’t give a crap about women and their safety.
Do not maintain a relationship with a Portuguese man because Portuguese men tend to be very chauvinist, violent and envious. Portuguese men are born manipulators and their humor consists of mocking and humiliating women (especially foreign women). On top of that, many are truly mentally ill – and the illness is not visible to the naked eye **. The truth is that, in general, Portuguese society is quite affected in its mental health **.
Be very careful: in Portugal everything is a trap, everything is hidden, fake… (including many figures of domestic violence are made up).

Original text in Spanish:

Alerta para las mujeres

Si sos mujer, en Portugal, tenés que cuidarte al doble: tu vida no vale nada en dicho país. A la policía portuguesa no le importa solucionar los crímenes en contra de las mujeres, y si sos extranjera, menos. Es decir, les chupa un huevo la mujer y su seguridad.
No mantenga una relación con un hombre portugués porque los portugueses suelen ser hombres muy machistas, violentos y envidiosos. El hombre portugués es un manipulador nato y su humor consiste en burlarse y humillar a las mujeres (sobretodo extranjeras). Encima muchos son verdaderos enfermos mentales – y la enfermedad no se nota la simple vista. ** La verdad que, en general, la sociedad portuguesa es bastante afectada en su salud mental**
Tenga mucho cuidado: en Portugal todo es una trampa, todo es oculto, falso.. (incluso muchos datos de violencia domestica están maquillados).

**
https://www.dn.pt/sociedade/portugal-e-o-2-pais-com-mais-casos-psiquiatricos-e-o-5-com-mais-depressoes-na-uniao-europeia-17096149.html/

 Reply
anonymous325
 1 year ago
The portuguese are well known within the anglophone world as prone to having an horrible attitude problem.
What to expect from a country where its citizens constantly mistreat their own by all sorts of different ways? It’s hard to believe anything about this country since they do so.

There’s 5 main chores I consider within portuguese evil:
– the justice
– the health
– the education
– the economy
– the sport

I believe you summarised well everything that is happening with the justice in Portugal. What is wrong is right there and what is right is wrong. Politics control everything in this country, even job offers, but specially justice.

Portugal like many developed countries in Europe has an underfunded health system. However the situation is even worse there as it ranks high for brain drain due to the poor economy and poor salaries. As this was not enough, many portuguese take advantage of this and a poor justice system to threaten health professionals (usually doctors, obviously) with sexual offences on courts in order to get easy money through indemnization. Situations like this are very common and very rarely they’re directed against poorer health professionals. No surprise from a poor country full of scum like Portugal. Apart from this it’s now emerging a team of unprofessional doulas since there has been many maternities closed for lacking of labour force. These doulas, instead of focusing on doing their work which many may find useful, prefer to focus on discrediting all the work done by health professionals, again, specially doctors of course, and selling the idea that all women should be giving birth naturally at home (there’s no birth centres in Portugal but they’re not worried about asking for them either), regardless the potential dangers. All this in order to increase their book of clients of course, not for real interest on the future mother’s health. Sometimes not even their own. There’s an Instagram page of a portuguese doula proudly describing her happy daughter’s birth, who aspired meconium after an induced birth using a shawl (a technique not recommended by doulas on developed countries) and was then born on a poor where her mother was sitting her dirty bottom for hours.

The public education is massively biased towards left wing politics. And as not enough, information is a subject of fear in Portugal. The education system or anything supposed to exist to inform someone, withdraws information instead. For narcissistic reasons and for competitive, manipulative and dictatorial ones too.

The economy is fully corrupt with big company groups, bankers, politicians and lawyers controlling the majority of it.

The sport. Portugal is a country of football, it seems like nothing else exists there. Not only they still have hooliganism it is massively corrupt, using the club, its management and even the organisations managing the sport for all sorts of criminal stuff, drugs, violence, harassment, etc. It’s no surprise many footballers have no luck in certain countries abroad. Their manners speak for themselves on the pitch. There was a recent case where one of them, playing abroad at top level, after spitting on another for no reason at all was put on training with the u-21 and then on loan somewhere else abroad. Hopefully to not return. Despite this or being average on pitch football organisations in his own country instead did and do everything to protect him/them and everyone around, getting involved on court cases and using harassment, threats and violence against those who mess with their little boys family or connections. Connections even get jobs after being jobless for ages because of the said and on companies related to the field. There’s a famous portuguese whistleblower exposing all the corruption around football in the country, including how games are won.

Since all this is a cultural problem, the only way to solve it is by total removal of its population and mingling them with more civilized ones. And avoid anything about the country while they’re still there.

 Reply
Vivienne
 1 year ago
There’s only one solution for Portugal

Give all the foreigners in Portugal 48 hours to evacuate, tell them it’s time to leave Portugal for the Portuguese.

Then nuke the entire country from orbit

It’s the only all way to be sure

Nuke it from orbit, it’s the only way to be sure” is a quote from the 1986 sci-fi film “Aliens” in which Ripley (played by Sigourney Weaver) decides that nothing is worth saving and that the only sure way to destroy all of the aliens (aliens = Portuguese) is to nuke their habitat from orbit

 Reply
anonymous
 1 year ago
In a Facebook group that is discussing the mistreatment of terminal patients, and relatives, in Portuguese hospitals, I found the following post. (I’m leaving out the name of the person who posted this, as well as the Facebook group where it was posted, to protect her privacy)

And the more I learn about Portugal, the more I’m starting to suspect that there are thousands, tens of thousands, maybe even hundreds of thousands of horrible stories similar to the one below, that have happened, and are happening now, even as I write this, in Portuguese hospitals, in a land of savage barbarians and inhuman monsters

But the truth about Portugal is finally starting to come out

Here’s the post:

In 2018 I gave birth to a stillborn baby on April 13th. After initial poor care from the maternity and local doctors combined with a total lack of communication Edwards Syndrome was diagnosed quite late. Even though I was 100% sure of my dates and an experienced mum we were told that I couldn’t possibly be as far in the pregnancy as I claimed as the baby was very small which is common with this condition. The staff were abrupt and uncaring, I became unwell and was admitted to Coimbra hospital as my blood pressure was extremely high.

To my dates our son, John Robert was born at 26 weeks gestation, they claimed I was 22 weeks. I was forced to give birth to him on a ward with other pregnant women around me, my husband wasn’t called and when I asked if I could see him I was told he was clinical waste and not to be ridiculous. When I vocalised I had the right to hold him and say goodbye I was drugged to knock me out. The next morning my husband arrived to find me restrained to my bed, bleeding heavily and with a bucket next to me to pee in. He took me home and called a private midwife we had hoped to use and they took me to a different hospital where they found I had retained placenta and needed surgery.

I was not allowed my sons remains for a funeral or given the chance to get anything to remember him by xx

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Thank you for this page. It has been my therapy knowing I am not alone on my struggles with my own people, the portuguese.

I live in England since the brexit referendum and I’ve been trying to keep these troubles aside from interfering with my new life I chose, away from all of them and anything related to this country on every aspect of my life. After 30 years dealing with all the things you and others describe here, not making any loyal and trustworthy friend at school, university, professional life, having problems after unnecessary problems, dealing with a biased, corrupt and formatted education system, being stolen on my social life and on my professional one, dealing with violence from those I thought cared, never being or doing anything right, discussing over petty unintelligent issues and even dealing with inconsiderate family members, I decided to leave to not return.

I didn’t leave for economic reasons. It was purely social. I visit there only for property reasons and my parents. And I’m a perfectly normal person, not ugly, not dumb, not disabled. I’m just not like them in terms of character. They keep complaining about everything but they’re the ones responsible. And since I moved abroad I realised how all of them look like they need antidepressants. Also, if you’re white they make racist comments. They did it to me on a social circle and also on my job.

To those who think estate agents steal clients there, they also steal workers. And only recently I realised what you described regarding the portuguese justice. I knew there was corruption on high profile cases on courts but I never imagined it was down to the commoners and the police until I had to deal with it myself. I knew the police was violent there but I never imagined they acted against the victims.

I started noticing it during covid but everyone went hypochondriac there and started mistreating others. But when I had to complain to the police about violence and had to see the case being twisted against me and having to deal with more violence, I knew for sure. And beware political interference as well and it can spread its wings if you live abroad as a portuguese national.

I also realised it recently. To the point I removed my portuguese electoral register details so my address details are shared only where it’s mandatory. There’s no point voting there anyway because the ones pretending to be interested in saving/changing the country are as fake and ill interested as the rest.

Having portuguese people on Facebook I have not because they feed on you for all sorts of ill intentions, cyber stalk, and I’m not even following or commenting on new situations that happen there, they will come to insult and downgrade as if I’m not entitled to an opinion or a private profile and nothing worthy of noticing and no change will really happen there if not for worse.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
My dear,

I understand and sympathize with 100% of everything you say, from the bottom of my heart, and I am very happy that this website serves to help foreigners, but that it is also serving to help good Portuguese like you, because for me, when there are good people there are no nationalities, who are also victims of the dictatorial overwhelming majority of a very bad character people who, incomprehensibly, only live and feed on practicing pure psychological and emotional evil, as there is no record anywhere else in the world, this gives me a lot of strength to continue making this website bigger and more complete, with your indispensable participation, for ALL of us, victims of the Portuguese Inferno!

You are not alone in this, nor is anyone else now, I and all the decent people who visit this website are with you, at least in thought, and rooting very strongly for you! Take care my friend! The worst is behind you, now, like the rest of us, you know why things are the way they are in Portugal, so from now on your life will only get better.

 Reply
Sofia
 1 year ago
Just wanted to say you write the best description of Portugal I have ever seen. I am portuguese and what you say is so, so true… above all “a wrong will never be made right, only wronger…” the cancer is the judicial system, god help anyone that ever has to contact with it. It’s like walking on moving sands. Anyway, I feel your pain, literally! If ever you pass by Ericeira, I ll gladly offer you a cup of tea and I promise you I don’t have the intelect of a mosquito!

All the best.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Sofia
 1 year ago
Hi Sofia,

Thank you for your words. It would be nice if the majority of Portuguese had the common sense and foresight that you do, so that they could put things right, everything would be so different in Portugal, first and foremost for the good of all Portuguese people. Well, it’s a tragedy and absurd that it isn’t.

Ericeira and its surfing beaches are very cool! Many thanks for the invitation! 😄🏄

Stay safe and be happy, don’t let anything bad happen to you in that “country”.

 Reply
No matter
 1 year ago
Humans and animals have many similarities, but one of the things that makes humans superior to animals is intelligence. which the Portuguese did not benefit from. I don’t think they (Portuguese) are human because humans can’t be that stupid. Stay away from the Portuguese, wherever you are in the world, if I were to write about the Portuguese, it would take 10 volumes of a 400-page book.

 Reply
Person
 Reply to  No matter
 1 year ago
“if I were to write about the Portuguese, it would take 10 volumes of a 400-page book.”

I was thinking the same the other day!

 Reply
anon4702
 1 year ago
I’m still searching through the lists of the best European artists and painters of the 20th century, looking for one Portuguese name

I’m up to number 1,500 now. Lots of Spanish, Italians, Germans, French, Dutch, Swiss, etc on the list of great artists and painters but so far, no Portuguese

Great artists tend to have empathy, compassion, creativity, originality, the ability to think differently etc, but Portuguese have none of these qualities, and I think that tells anyone all you need to know about them.

Portuguese might look more or less human, but something is definitely missing

I could have done the same search for great writers, original scientists, philosophers, inventors, etc, with the same result: there would be no Portuguese names on any of these lists

Portugal should not be a part of Europe. It should be a part of sub-Saharan Africa (considered to have the lowest IQ of any group on earth) although in fact, saying this is quite an insult to sub-Saharan Africans because it’s obvious to anyone who’s ever been there, that the sub-Saharan Africans are far better people, they are more sympathetic, more honest, much friendlier, and are superior to the Portuguese, in almost every way you can think of

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Portuguese… Evil lives within them.

1000008046
 Reply
Shocked (again)
 1 year ago
In December 2023 a mother of 2 boys deliberately drove herself, her mother and her 2 boys, aged 13 and 15, over a cliff in Cascais, Portugal. Killing herself and her mother, the two boys survived.

She worked at a bank, Millennium BCP of Ericeira, and she stole more than 3 million Euros from her clients.

On 6 December 2023 management at BCP scheduled an audit on her for the next day.

In order not to get caught, she intended to kill her whole family as her, now, millions in debt would be transferred to her family if she had only taken her own life.

#stranger crimes are low @ Portugal
#family crimes are the norm @ Portugal

https://youtu.be/9iZalIKXc_k?si=1b3ZXp0as6fzfnSo

https://www.noticiasdecoimbra.pt/mulher-arrasta-para-a-morte-a-mae-e-os-filhos-menores-por-ter-desviado-milhoes/

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Shocked (again)
 1 year ago
Thanks for the news, tragically very commonplace in Portugal, but killing her own children?! And her own mother?! What kind of human being is she?!

I’ve also heard of another similar situation that happened (a long time ago, only briefly on a TV channel, and there’s nothing written about it, I wonder why?), by the way, with that same bank, in which an employee did the same thing, but this time stole 10 million euros (as far as we know) from countless regular customers of the bank, over 3 years! Including a former Portuguese immigrant in France who was robbed of 900,000 euros, all her money from a lifetime of hard work in France, only to come to Portugal and instantly lose everything! As if that wasn’t enough, this poor old lady was also forced to pay 50,000 euros in taxes (not due) on this stolen amount, due to fictitious financial transactions that this criminal employee made in her name! It should be noted that this employee had already accumulated complaints from stolen customers with the police and the courts for more than 3 years (and certainly the bank itself), but the police said that it was not really “opportune” to contact the “suspect”, during 3 years!!! While more people were being robbed! Total insanity!

ATTENTION EVERYONE!
You won’t believe it, but when these crimes happen in Portugal, the Portuguese banks NEVER, to my knowledge so far, take responsibility and don’t return the money stolen by THEIR employee to their customers! In any country, OBVIOUSLY the bank has to return the money, because the crime was committed on its premises by an employee of theirs, obviously the theft is done to the bank and not to the customers, the bank is the one that then has to bring its employee to justice, and not obviously the stolen customers, who have nothing to do with the matter! (On top of that, as we all know, “Portuguese (in)justice” won’t do any good, because the victims will be even more destitute and the judge will dismiss the case and give the bank the all-clear, after a decade or more of being tortured by the Portuguese courts! Just as the thief never returns the stolen money and never suffers any real and fair consequences either!) Portugal is hell on earth! Madness and crime is total, omnipresent and legal! Escape and save yourselves!

This is just another of the million and one ways to be destitute in Portugal and have your life obliterated INSTANTLY, i.e. deposit your money in a Portuguese bank and NEVER see it again!!!

Here’s another link to another similar case (in Portuguese):
https://www.cmjornal.pt/portugal/detalhe/bancario-desvia-um-milhao-de-euros-dos-clientes

 Reply
anonymous
 1 year ago
Some good news!

It looks like the tide might be really turning against Portugal now. I think the Portuguese government has finally pissed off the wrong group of people, and now that group is retaliating, with a vengeance.

I doubt the Portuguese saw one this coming

They are evil, but they’re also stupid

As briefly as possible, here’s my understanding of what happened

The Jewish community of Porto, Portugal, with members from 30 countries around the world, says they were scammed by the Portuguese government.

They say the Portuguese government promised that anyone who could prove Sephardic ancestry would be granted Portuguese citizenship, to compensate the Jewish community for the Portuguese slaughtering thousands of Sephardic Jews over 500 years ago, and forcing the survivors to either convert to Christianity or leave Portugal

According to the Portuguese government this was to make up for that massacre and expulsion of Jews over 500 years ago, but according to the Jewish community of Porto, this was all a scam, the Portuguese government lied to them, and did not follow through on any of their promises.

Big surprise, right?

But it doesn’t end there. Jewish communities don’t ordinarily double as film production companies, but the community of Porto, Portugal, has shown itself to be anything but ordinary. The Porto Jewish community has made a film about the Portuguese called “1506: The Lisbon Genocide.”

The movie chronicles the massacre of Lisbon’s Jews in the 16th century.

The film will premiere on April 19, 2024, just over 2 weeks, and will be available for free in multiple languages ​​and online platforms, around the world

This is obviously to retaliate against the Portuguese government.

I’m not Jewish and I don’t have any Jewish friends, but the way I see it, the enemy of my enemy is my friend. For attacking the Portuguese people with this film, which hopefully will be watched by tens of thousands of people, the Porto Jewish community is my friend. We have the same enemy, therefore we are on the same side

I hope hundreds of thousands of people watch this film for free on April 19. Or thousands watch it and encourage thousands more to watch it, and so on

Look at the faces of the Portuguese in this trailer below. These are the faces of Portuguese scum that readers of this blog are well aware of

Now it’s time for the rest of the world to see those horrible faces (that have not changed in 500 years) and to become aware of what total scum the Portuguese are.

This film is going to help that happen

1506 – The Lisbon Genocide

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l4k2ChHxnY0

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  anonymous
 1 year ago
The Portuguese have been horrible to the Jews during the inquisition. Many left the country, the ones who stayed had to convert or were burned alive. Many ended up in Amsterdam and were very wealthy with their int. contacts. They contributed a lot to the Golden Century. If they would not have been expelled, Portugal would have been much better off, economically, culturally and on educational level. In 2013 they made a new law. The ‘ law of return’. Not because out of guilt, but they hoped to get the ‘ rich ‘ Jew back and get a better economy. Now too many rich Jews are setting up their good businesses and the only thing Portuguese do is not cooperating with them but envy them and trying to make their lives miserable. Read about it, the arrest of a rabbi and so fort…

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  anonymous
 1 year ago
Thank you very much for yet another very interesting and revealing information about the already infamous lack of character of the Portuguese in general. I certainly won’t miss this movie that tells yet another shaming of Portuguese history, hitherto hushed up, and by the way very ancient. Dammit, even the Jews are scammed in Portugal, and over something so horrific! Well done to the Jewish community for denouncing that filthy country to the world, which is what needs to be done! I’ve never seen people as unworthy and degenerate as the Portuguese overall. Incomprehensible!

 Reply
Sabryna Tenorio
 1 year ago
I’m brazilian and i live in Brazil and I didn’t know about all these cases in Portugal, of course I don’t believe that all Portuguese people are like that, but there really are these types of bad Portuguese people.

 Reply
Jennifer
 1 year ago
I’m just a girl with a vivid imagination

My Dad was scammed out of his money in Portugal. He tried going to court to recover his stolen money, but just ended up losing even more money to a crooked lawyer

This almost destroyed our family.

We left Portugal, we are still in the process of recovering, and we are starting to get better now

My Dad is peaceful and non-violent, and when he lost his case in court, the only solution that he could see left was for us to leave Portugal.

Some days I like to imagine what would have happened if my Dad had not been so peaceful and non-violent.

Instead of peacefully leaving the country after he lost most of his money, what if my Dad had resorted to violence and revenge instead?

(Disclaimer: I am not advocating violence or revenge. My family now lives thousands of miles away from Portugal. We are peaceful and non-violent)

But a girl still has a right to dream, doesn’t she?

I love to imagine that instead of peacefully leaving the country, after losing most of his money to Portuguese scammers, what if my Dad had reacted very differently, as you will see beginning at around the 42 second mark, in this video that only lasts around 4 minutes.

And in my dreams, all the “bad guys” being gunned down in this video, beginning at the 40 second mark, are Portuguese scammers, who believed they had gotten away with their crimes.

If you watch this video the way I’m watching it, it is beautiful and uplifting. It will make you feel good. In my imagination, my Dad is the guy with long blond hair, and sunglasses, smiling (played by Val Kilmer), looking for revenge, who appears at the 42 second mark in the video below.

All the ones being gunned down in the entire video are Portuguese scammers, who deserve what they get

I’m just a girl, I don’t even have a hand-gun, and wouldn’t know how to use one if I did, but like I said, a girl has a right to dream, doesn’t she?

Last thing: when even peaceful young girls like me, start thinking this way about Portugal, maybe the Portuguese people should be concerned

Leaving Portugal (Re-imagined)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ruQl5Y9s1Zc

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Jennifer
 1 year ago
I am very sorry for what happened to your family in Poortugal, the same thing happened to me and countless other victims every day, it’s the “justice” pattern in Poortugal, the Portuguese judicial system is itself a monstrosity scam! You are unfortunately another victim, along with me and millions of others who have been robbed almost to the last cent and their lives crushed, by a Portuguese society full of criminals under the total protection of its equally criminal institutions. Portugal is a stinking country that lives off systemic theft! Poortugal is nothing more than that.

You can be sure that you’re not the only one to have those thoughts, I’ve had them many times, because it’s the natural feeling of justice over the atrocious injustices that good citizens are subjected to in that cesspit, and even more so when we’re talking about scum of the lowest order, who quite frankly shouldn’t even have been born.

I firmly believe that at least 10% of the Portuguese population has already committed crimes deserving of a prison sentence, and at least 60% of Portuguese politicians and magistrates, but they are all free. While practically the rest of the population is no good at all. That’s why Portugal is so dangerous. This cesspit of pseudo-country should really be dismantled because it is a fact that it only serves to harbor unpunished and protected criminals who do a lot of harm to good people. I wish that were possible. But at least we can warn each other and boycott Portugal in the meantime.

Fortunately, I believe more and more that Portugal’s days are numbered, the world is discovering all the horrors little by little.

I wish you and your father all the best.

 Reply
Tony
 1 year ago
I don’t know if people are aware of the fact that the Portuguese have an unusually high amount of psychiatric disturbances, there is a considerable high amount of inbreeding in Portugal, I live in a small place by the coast, and I think a least 70% are related.
This can explain some anti-social components and deviations of the “normal”.

https://www.sppsm.org/informemente/perturbacao-mental-em-numeros/

More than a fifth of Portuguese people suffer from a psychiatric disorder (22.9%).
Portugal is the second country with the highest prevalence of psychiatric illnesses in Europe, only surpassed by Northern Ireland (23.1%).
Among psychiatric disorders, anxiety disorders have the highest prevalence (16.5%), followed by mood disorders, with a prevalence of 7.9%.
Impulse control disorders and substance abuse disorders have lower prevalence rates, respectively, with 3.5% and 1.6% prevalence.
Around 4% of the adult population has a severe mental disorder, 11.6% a moderate mental disorder and 7.3% a mild mental disorder.
Mental and behavioral disorders represent 11.8% of the global burden of disease in Portugal, more than oncological diseases (10.4%) and only surpassed by cerebro-cardiovascular diseases (13.7%).

 Reply
Linda Aune
 1 year ago
This came up when I searched for “lazy and impolite Portuguese”. Good to see I am not the only one reacting.
I was in Portugal one month (February), one month in Brazil (March) and now back in Portugal since Wednesday, and have got a total culture shock. Where the Brazilians are welcoming, including and generally happy – Portuguese are the opposite.
Ex. In Brazil I was briefly bitten by a stray dog and needed rabies prophylaxis (4 vaccines taken in intervals). I took two vaccines in Brazil, and only official hospitals and health stations are allowed to administer them. Both times, without speaking Portuguese and being able to order an appointment, I got in after 30 minutes. In Portugal I had to run around from hospital to hospital and it took 24! hours to get help 🙄 I was close to panic as obviously I do not want to die from rabies. The health “professionals” I met could not care less, and I ended up taking it in a pharmacy after being turned down by other pharmacies also. And I have health insurance. What the f**k is this country???
I regret I booked a place to stay 15 more days, I really hate it here. Also, last night (I am in Portimão) I had to walk down as no taxi was on duty 😮 This I never have experienced anywhere, and I’ve been to 26 countries.
Thank you for clearing things up, good to see I am not the only one. Yes, there are some nice people here, but very few.

Last edited 1 year ago by Linda Aune
 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Linda Aune
 1 year ago
Just to add to the discussion, there haven’t been any cases of rabies in Portugal since the early 80s, it’s considered to be eradicated. As far as I know, there’s only one place where you could (theoretically) get the vaccine, at the Ricardo Jorge institute, where they study infectious diseases. Pharmacies don’t sell it, because there’s no need for it. COVID-19 vaccines, on the other hand…

 Reply
Céline
 Reply to  Linda Aune
 1 year ago
When I lived in Portugal, I could always tell from a distance who the Brazilians were, because they were the only ones who appeared to be friendly and smiling

The way that Portuguese treat Brazilians is disgusting. It’s a national disgrace.

The Brazilians are far better people than the Portuguese, there is no comparison

As soon as Portuguese hear someone speaking Portuguese with a Brazilian accent, their entire attitude changes to one of hatred and hostility

I met a Brazilian in Portugal who looked European and she told me she that she only spoke English to Portuguese, because like this, they believed she was a tourist, not a Brazilian, and so she was treated better now than before, because when she used to speak Portuguese with her Brazilian accent, they always treated her like shit

And yes, it’s common now for Portuguese hospitals to refuse entry to a foreigner who doesn’t speak Portuguese, even if they’re experiencing a medical emergency

I’m out of that nightmare place, living far away from Portugal, but I still have friends who are trapped there, and they tell me the latest thing happening in Portugal now, is for Portuguese who work in service jobs and who speak English, to REFUSE to speak English to a foreigner

No other country in the world would do something like that, but these people are not civilized. They are savages

And so, for example, a foreigner in Portugal, who is involved in a car accident with a Portuguese driving recklessly, might be refused admission to the emergency room in the hospital, unless they can speak fluent Portuguese

This is insane!

Portugal is a nightmare land, most civilized people can’t even imagine how bad it is, but people need to start getting the word out, to STAY THE HELL AWAY from Portugal

This website is doing a great service by trying to warn people about Portugal, and thank you for all the work you’ve done

 Reply
Linda Aune
 Reply to  Céline
 1 year ago
I will go back to Spain 13 days from now, fortunately.

Another example: I travel with my small dog in cabin, and we needed a travel certificate which is valid for 60 days, issued by the Direção-Geral de Alimentação e Veterinária. I took me at least ten hours of paper work and phone calls to finally go get it in Faro. Then when I arrived they STILL did not have it ready as they were discussing if my dogs titertest was valid or not. I had to google “EU approved laboratories” for them and show them the lab I used in fact was listed there 🙄
Then, and most important, they forgot to tell me they had made an important rule two years prior – now everyone coming from Brazil with dogs needs to notify Direção-Geral de Alimentação e Veterinária three days upon arrival = I almost did not get my sweet, little dog with me 🥺 The TapAir assistant in Brazil was running back and forth with her manager, and after 20 minutes wait she said they would do an exception for this time, but next time it would not work.
When I arrived in Lisbon I was still so upset I just went to the custom, showed my dogs EU pet passport (I am Norwegian), smiled and was told they did not need anything from us. They did not even open it as they probably thought we came from within Schengen.
I will leave in 13 days as said, but this is how I am built – you try anything with me, you get a response 👍🏻

Last edited 1 year ago by Linda Aune
 Reply
Céline
 Reply to  Linda Aune
 1 year ago
Please take precautions and stay safe during your last few days in Portugal

On July 13, 2020, an Irish woman, Jean Tighe, walked out of her hostel in Parede, Portugal, with an unknown Portuguese man, and vanished without a trace

Here we are 3 years and 9 months later, and the Portuguese police have not even started any investigation or search for this missing woman

Probably she was raped and murdered by a Portuguese man, but without a police investigation, there is no way to know for certain

And the ONLY reason a few of us have even heard of this missing Irish woman is thanks to the love and devotion of Jean’s sister, Leona Tighe, who has spent over three and a half years searching tirelessly for her sister, without any help at all from the Portuguese police, whose responses to Leona’s questions have been horrible….

For example, when the Portuguese police even bothered to respond at all to Leona Tighe’s questions, it was something along the lines of: “Oh, your sister has gone off to live her own life”

Only in Portugal

Leona Tighe hired a private investigator and she spoke to alternative, NON-Portuguese media, outside Portugal, otherwise NO ONE would have ever heard that her sister went missing in Portugal, in July 2020, with no police investigation.

How many other cases are there of young women who go missing in Portugal?

Young women who do not have a devoted, loving sister who is willing to spend her life savings and OVER THREE YEARS of her life, trying to bring attention to their family member’s disappearance.

My guess is there are thousands of young foreign women who go missing in Portugal, and are never found, maybe tens of thousands

But there is no way anyone would ever hear anything about these missing foreign women, not from the Portuguese media or the Portuguese police, and not from the Portuguese people

https://www.independent.ie/irish-news/we-dont-believe-people-just-disappear-family-of-missing-irish-woman-jean-tighe/a2130751992.html

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Céline
 1 year ago
There are articles on Portuguese media about Jean Tighe. The COVID lockdown probably didn’t help the procedures. Around that time, I filed a complaint to the police, as I was the victim of a small crime. I sent the authorities information that would identify the perpetrator (place of residence, photo, phone number, bank account number), waited over two years for their reply: “unknown individual, complaint archived”. Going out on a limb here, the level of the Portuguese authorities’ investigative abilities is probably not world class. Or… they just don’t give a shit.

I know that hostel, it’s close to the train station, they have cameras, did they bother to look at the footage? The taxi drivers in front of the hostel saw her with a Brazilian man, were they interviewed, did the police try sketching a likeness of the man she was seen with? Curious as to what they actually investigated, especially since the investigation only started two years after the disappearance. Her supposed boyfriend was found murdered some time later, he lived in a ghetto, basically. Who else was she hanging out with, did she get into trouble with the wrong sort of people? Do the Portuguese police have anything to say about this? I wonder.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Linda Aune
 1 year ago
Your whole story about your stay in nightmare Portugal is absolutely terrifying and instructive! In other words, you could very well have died of rabies, because the Portuguese “professionals” simply continually refused to give you a vaccine that was vital for your survival 😱, which you were still only able to take randomly 24 hours after it was due, that is, you were very lucky, because the dog that bit you really shouldn’t have been infected, otherwise, the vaccines given in Portugal with that enormous delay would probably no longer be effective in saving you 😱 (and the real reason for your death would never be known, they would say you had something wrong), and as if that wasn’t enough, they still wanted to take your puppy away from you, and only after you fought hard and long with all your might against the infinite stupidity and ill will of the Portuguese in general, did they tell you that they would let you keep your dog because they were doing you a favor! 😰😡

Your case is an excellent example of how our lives and dignity are worth absolutely nothing in Portugal and how completely erratic and lunatic everything is in Portugal, and therefore how our lives can literally be obliterated there by literally anything and everything, as if we were flies!

The danger of living in or even just visiting Portugal can never be underestimated, it’s not even safe for vacations! Portugal is like playing Russian roulette, very dangerous!

Life is too precious to waste another day in Poortugal! Never come and those who are, please flee! Thank you very much for your testimony, it will help many people and I’m sure prevent many tragedies and sorrows, however, I wonder how many anonymous tragedies of the same absurd level have already happened (RIP).

 Reply
Anónimo
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Like little Madeleine McCann
Original Spanish text:
“Como la pequeña Madeleine McCann”

 Reply
anon70
 1 year ago
After being scammed out of most of my money in Portugal, an immense hatred keeps me alive…..

I would live for five hundred years, five thousand years, if I were certain of seeing every damn Portuguese in the whole world croak

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  anon70
 1 year ago
Given that we’re talking about Portuguese people in general, your feelings of enormous revolt and indignation are totally justified and understandable. Feelings that are unfortunately shared by me and by millions of people extorted to the last cent, mocked, violated and humiliated by unpunished criminal vermin, including and especially those in the system, cowardly protected by their shitty sovereignty. Portugal is a scourge on the world that, in a totally just world, would have to be eliminated (as a legal entity), or if that’s not possible, at least be totally ostracized by the civilized and democratic world, because it only exists to do evil, a monstrous and totally inhuman evil.

My friend, I too will not rest for a minute until the whole world, so to speak, gets to know the real Portugal, an entity that is fundamentally all criminal from the bottom to the top.

I wish you all the strength in the world, and in the end you are infinitely superior to the Portuguese vermin who have done you so much harm, as they will always be vermin and you a person with infinite horizons ready to be reached.

 Reply
anonymous
 1 year ago
Thank you for this site, you are doing a great service. And the truth about Portugal is finally starting to come out

A few months ago, when I was still in Portugal, a man in a Cafe told me that his son’s car was hit by a Portuguese driver going 160 kilometers an hour on a side street.

His son (who name was Frederic) had his lungs punctured, and his wife who was driving, was impaled on the steering-columns,

There was a pool of vomit with clots of blood everywhere.

When the Portuguese police finally arrived they told Frederic and his wife, that they could not help them unless they spoke Portuguese. The police were speaking English when they said this

Unbelievable

But apparently this is the latest thing now, in Portugal, Portuguese who speak English are refusing to speak English to foreigners

Somehow Frederic’s daughter who was in the back seat and had less injuries, was able to call a friend who got there as fast as possible, and got all of them to a hospital

But it was too late to save them and the man’s son and his son’s wife both died that night. His grand-daughter survived, however she is completely traumatized by what happened

Can you trust that this Portuguese hospital even tried to save their lives? I really doubt it. They probably insisted that they speak Portuguese before letting them die

And the man in the Cafe said he told this story to several Portuguese who did not think the police had done anything wrong.

What kind of mentality are we dealing with?

When the man told me this story I didn’t believe him at first, because it did not seem possible. Not in a European country. Not in a civilized country. No way, it wasn’t possible, I couldn’t even imagine it.

But that was a few months ago. Before I started to see the dark side of Portugal, before I left the country, before I found this poortugal scum website, before I spoke to a Finnish man who told me he was scammed out of all his money in Portugal, and he told me there was no judiciary system in Portugal, only one scam after another… before I started looking for all the dark things that are hidden in Portugal, and I started connecting all the dots

Now, after what I’ve learned about Portugal, I believe that the story this man in the Cafe told me, was probably true. I believe he was telling me the truth

It’s a very very dark place. Most people from civilized countries can’t even imagine what it’s like

And the Portuguese are the most horrible people on earth

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  anonymous
 1 year ago
So horrible and so sad, and even more horrible that it’s actually the normal reality in Portugal and not the exception. Thank you very much for your testimony, we need to warn the world of the enormous (hidden) danger that living in Portugal represents, fortunately this site can help, since on the internet there is only lying propaganda from the Portuguese government and media.

Nobody from Portugal speaks the truth and the world has been fooled, but now the scam is over! I don’t want to see any more victims of Portugal and the Portuguese!!!

 Reply
jbailie
 1 year ago
I’ve been going through the lists of greatest European painters of the 20th century and all time, and their country, greatest European artists of the 20th century and all time, and their country, greatest writers of the 20th century and of all time, poets, etc etc

And so far I haven’t found one single Portuguese name out of hundreds of great artists, writers, painters, poets, and creative genuises

Why am I not surprised?

Not one Portuguese. Not one. This is because mentally the vast majority of Portuguese are stone age barbarians

 Reply
Miguel
 Reply to  jbailie
 1 year ago
Because truth is Portugal lacks a public space for art. There are no cosmopolitan trends in Portugal with the exception of sightseeing and tourism, but even this is an old, outdated “concept”. Whenever something new or hip comes out, in the market, it never becomes public knowledge in the public space of Portugal, unlike perhaps in France or UK. The Salazar years made that possible by basically eradicating the exchange of ideas through dialogue.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  jbailie
 1 year ago
That really is a great fact and proves everything! Likewise, if you try to find great scientists, even great politicians who made a difference at very difficult and decisive times, and pretty much any more essential profession (however, all professions are important) in the culture, economy and science of humanity that I can think of and who really moved humanity forward as a whole, there are never any Portuguese there, not one.
The irrefutable truth is that in Portugal, almost exclusively, only very evil and simultaneously mentally defective people are born! And the worst kind in the world! As most of us have already horribly experienced.
The world is currently going through an exponential phase of evolution, and Portuguese society will never, ever catch up with this train, and it will become increasingly obvious to the world the true state of neanderthalism of the Portuguese people, a total lack of any real trace of what makes us human (intelligence, moral values, feelings, empathy) and no worse than animals, as the vast majority of Portuguese people are.

The Portuguese, for the most part, are truly horrible people, who only cause pain and suffering to those who have or have had the misfortune of dealing with them! Nothing is created in Portugal. Everything is stolen and everything is destroyed!

Finally, the truth about Portugal is coming out: Portugal will no longer be able to continue scamming foreigners and often destroying their lives.

 Reply
Jersey Jokester
 1 year ago
When I recently worked for few months in Portugal, I can’t count the number of times I was told to “go back home” or “we speak Portuguese here”

I was there to do a job. I was not a resident and I was not a tourist

I disliked the Portuguese people intensely (“dislike” is putting it mildly) and I resented them telling me to “go back home” when I was just there on business (aircraft maintenance) and I was just doing my job and minding my own damn business

So I came back to my home, in Newark, New Jersey.

In what is called the Ironbound district of Newark, there’s a large Portuguese community

The other day I went over to the Ironbound district, just to walk and have a look around. I stopped at a Cafe to order coffee and a snack, and there I was made to feel like I did not belong, and despite being friendly, at first, I was not made to feel welcomed at all, because I wasn’t Portuguese

Everyone around me was speaking Portuguese, ignoring me

I decided to hell with this. First I paid for my order

I stood up and screamed at all of them: “Shut the f**k up! We speak English here, get the hell out of my country. Go back home to Portugal, you f**king savages! You are NOT welcome in my country! Get the f**k out! I’ll be back and when I come back, you had better be gone!”

Man, you should have seen the shocked expressions on their dumb, stupid faces. It felt so good, to treat portuguese people, in my own country, in my home town, exactly same way they had treated me in their country

Then I stood up without saying another word, and walked out there

Of course, I’ll never go back to Ironbound, but they don’t know that, so let them always wonder when is that crazy guy who hates our guts, when is he coming back here?

 Reply
Tony
 Reply to  Jersey Jokester
 1 year ago
Good on you! made me smile 🙂

 Reply
Aurélie
 1 year ago
I’m a French woman who is trapped in Portugal (until I can find a way out) and do you know what a Portuguese man recently said to me about foreign women in Portugal?

We were speaking in English. Here’s what he said: “When I see a pretty foreign girl walking down the street I think two things. One part of me wants to take her out and talk to her and be real nice and sweet and treat her right”

I stop and finish my glass of wine in one swallow. I’m afraid to ask him, but despite my anxiety, I tentatively ask the Portuguese man: “And what does the other part of you think?”

He answers me: “What her head would look like on a stick”

I’m not sure what I said to him in response to that, I think I was too shocked to say anything, but I know I got the hell out of there, and got away from this psycho, as fast as I could run

And that was probably the last conversation I’ll ever have with a Portuguese man

 Reply
Miguel
 Reply to  Aurélie
 1 year ago
Wow, sounds gory and creepy. On behalf of Portuguese men, I apologize.

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
You have no idea how relieving finding this blog has been for my family and I. We moved here not too long ago after buying the idea that Portugal was this amazing paradise, hidden gem in Europe with all the benefits from the first world and also a calm, laid-back culture where no one bothers you and you can be free and have everything you need because of how cheap it all is.

It didn’t take long before we realised that everything here is broken: prices are inflated, no one cares to help, everything has to go through massive bureaucratic processes before it’s even considered, everyone will try to scam you even if the benefit is less than what they will lose long-term, everyone is mean-spirited and will gaslight you into thinking whatever happened is your fault and you’re wrong for whatever they feel like blaming you for.

People will maybe invite you for coffee once and then expect you to do everything for them for life while laughing at you at your face… Even most, if not all, immigrants/expats we met in Portugal (which have all been living there longer than 2 years in our experience) are mean-spirited and try to take advantage of you after telling you they don’t like the Portuguese for the EXACT SAME THINGS THEY DO TO YOU. It contaminates everyone, we’ve been to many countries and even if the people aren’t always the friendliest, most won’t try to go out of their way to scam you, and the immigrants are always extremely warm and trying to make connections. If there is a black hole of evil in the world, it’s definitely in Poortugal.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
I wish you and your family all the best. You will get everything you aspire to and deserve!

 Reply
anon45
 1 year ago
It’s time for a little humor, but considering the topic is Portugal, I’m afraid this will have to be dark humor.

There are 2 or 3 recent facebook groups where foreigners, immigrants and expats are just beginning to discover (and to discuss) the negative side of Portugal. Most of them are beginners, and they still have a long way to go, but even the slightest negativity is too much for some Portuguese lovers, so one of them asked the following question:

“I just wish in this forum there was a modicum of positivity. It’s supposed to be ‘The Truth’ right? To me it just feels like a whinging forum; negative, negative, negative.

Come on guys, is there not an iota of something good in the whole of Portugal?”

Yeah, I’ve been thinking that

Still thinking….

It wasn’t easy, but I did manage to think of one thing about Portugal that’s kind of positive or at least it doesn’t bother me too much

Graveyards.

Yes, I have no bone to pick with portuguese graveyards

After I was scammed out of my money, and before I was able to leave that country of con artists, and criminals, sometimes I used to hang out at the graveyards…

You Portuguese lovers – you can keep all the rest of the country, to yourselves, just leave me the graveyards.

My sandwich, my banana, tasted sweeter when I was sitting on a portuguese tomb, thinking about all the money I lost there, and when the time came to p*ss again, as it so often does, I had my pick.

And the smell of portuguese corpses, distinctly per­ceptible under those of grass and humus mingled, I did not find un­pleasant, a trifle on the sweet side perhaps, but how in­finitely preferable to the smell that the living Portuguese emit, their feet, teeth, armpits, etc

The living Portuguese wash in vain, in vain they put on lots of perfume, but this doesn’t hide the fact that they are horrible people, and that they stink

It looks like the good ones are all dead, assuming they ever existed, and the best Portuguese are the ones buried in the cemeteries

 Reply
Lucien
 1 year ago
Before escaping Portugal to an undisclosed safe location where I live now, and for reasons that are too complicated to explain, somehow, for a few months, I ended up being the only foreigner living in a Portuguese village

Never again.

No one ever spoke to me, and the villagers were openly hostile, but then it got worse

One day when I was out walking around the village, someone came up and jabbed me from behind with a rake. I jumped aside. Someone else pricked me with a sharp prong. Again I sprang away, crying loudly.

The portuguese crowd became more lively. “vá para casa estrangeiro” (go home foreigner) they screamed at me

A stone struck me. I lay down, face to the earth, not wishing to know what might happen next. My head was being bombarded with dried cow dung, moldy potatoes, apple cores, handfuls of dirt, and small stones. I covered my face with my hands and screamed into the dust which covered the road.

That’s the day when I started planning my escape

And I’ve heard many stories similar to this one, from foreigners who had (or in some cases still have) the misfortune to live in Portugal

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Lucien
 1 year ago
It’s horrible to hear! The reality of Portugal is that the majority of the Portuguese population never left the Stone Age mindset. I’m very glad you managed to get away from those animals and get back to the life you were robbed of in Poortugal.

 Reply
Filipe Mendes
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
You are such an idiot asshole. The fact you had a bad experience, doesn’t mean that Portugal is the worst place in the world and the portuguese are worst people in the world.

 Reply
Kia
 1 year ago
In Portugal
No matter how good you are, they will take revenge on you for no reason in the dirtiest way possible. Portugal is a society full of mental patients.

 Reply
João
 1 year ago
All I have to say is, I’m done with this country and I am from this country, but I’m not portuguese. Everyone is a narcissist in portugal.

 Reply
Mark
 1 year ago
Portuguese people can’t bear to hear criticism and facts, they love to hear compliments, even false compliments. This country is a dictatorship with dictatorial people and rotten brains.

 Reply
MANUEL CUNHA
 1 year ago
This blog is authored by a mentally ill person who must have serious problems and who is in need of medical attention… honestly, I don’t know how you can cooperate in this kind of joke… similar problems exist in many countries, now you can’t go along with the nonsense of a mentally ill person or else you’re worse than him. The administrator of this blog is any abnormal person who urgently needs to be institutionalized… him and the idiots who comment here!

 Reply
Tony
 Reply to  MANUEL CUNHA
 1 year ago
This blog is 99% right, it’s a beautiful country, only a shame so much dumb, ignorant, envious, corrupt people live in it
(I am Portuguese)

 Reply
Kia
 Reply to  MANUEL CUNHA
 1 year ago
You Portuguese are so mean and jealous and bastards that meanness is normal for you and it has become part of your culture, that’s why you don’t accept it when someone criticizes you. There are good and bad people everywhere in the world, but in Portugal there are bad and very bad people

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  MANUEL CUNHA
 1 year ago
You know what is sad ? That the 99 % of the crooked, vicious and evil Portuguese ruin it for the other 1 percent. 🙂

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  MANUEL CUNHA
 1 year ago
The author of this blog is so right as he can be. I ‘ve had many many horrible experiences in your horrible country. I have been around in this world but Portugal is rotten til the bone. Dishonest, evil, vicious, corrupt, passive fatalistic. I know why you are so damn poor. Because you deserve it. There is nothing to be proud of. Btw, they never laugh in your country. Portuguese are depressing people. Any thing else ?

 Reply
Linda Aune
 Reply to  Jens
 1 year ago
Just read how this person express himself 🙄 Only professionals are allowed to diagnose a person as “mentally ill” and only a very immature person would act out like this.
Yesterday I went out in Portimão, and briefly spoke to four Portuguese people which were extremely rude. I do not take disrespect from anyone and told them how disgusting their behavior was, the answer? “Try acting like that in any other country and see how it goes” which I replied “I have been to 26 countries and have never met people like you”. Then she replied “Had I not been pregnant I would have hit you”.

Honestly, the only nice people I meet here are other tourists and expats. Just came here after one month in Brazil and it’s like coming from heaven to hell.

Last edited 1 year ago by Linda Aune
 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Linda Aune
 1 year ago
Oh yes, people in Latin America in general tend to be very welcoming and friendly. You have some crime and some very rotten apples, but everyone else is lovely.

In Portugal however… No one helps, even if you pay, no one is respectful, they will try to make fun of you, or help you with the simplest thing and expect eternal gratitude, no one smiles for the right reason.

I saw your other comment, about rabbies, and I’m glad you ended up getting your shot, others were probably less fortunate in this cesspit of a country.

Please, get out of here as soon as you can, before they scam you, and be happy with your family elsewhere.

 Reply
anonymous
 1 year ago
I was scammed out of all my money in Portugal. Since leaving there, I’ve been homeless for weeks, and I’ve lived in 15 rented rooms. I’m barely surviving, because all my life savings were stolen by Portuguese criminals, who call themselves “real estate agents” or “lawyers”

I’m in my own country now, in northern Europe…..thank god at least I got out of that crime scene alive, and every moment of every day, no matter how difficult my life is, I am always grateful to be out of Portugal, and to be surrounded by human beings with compassion and empathy instead of being surrounded by monsters

I would prefer to be homeless in northern Europe, than to have a so-called “home” in Portugal

The truth of that horrible place is completely censored, totally hidden…. no one knows the truth, the truth is very dark and it’s all hidden. Even the few of us who know there is a very dark side to Portugal probably know less than one percent of just how bad it really is, and what’s really happening there….

And so I’ve written a poem to Portugal, inspired by Paul Celan’s “Death Fugue”. “Death Fugue” was about Germany in the 1940s. This is my version of Paul Celan’s Death Fugue, adapted to Portugal in 2024, instead of Germany in the 1940s

This is my revenge

Portugal (a poem)

A portuguese man lives in the house he plays with his snakes
he tortures his dogs, he drowns stray cats
he looks for foreigners to scam but they’ve all gone, they either left the country, or they’re dead, or hiding
he whistles his foreigners to appear, give me money, when the money’s gone let a grave be dug in the earth, for you
but they’re gone
he commands foreigners give me money then leave my country
He calls jab deeper into the earth you foreign lot there
he grabs the gun in his belt he draws it his eyes are black
he plays with the snakes, he tortures his dogs, he drowns a stray cat
He calls out death is a master from Portugal
he calls out dig deeper, you foreigner there, give me money, dig that grave
then you’ll have a grave in the dirt there you’ll lie at ease
death is a master from Portugal his eyes are black, beady black eyes, the color of shit
he strikes you with lead bullets his aim is true
he sets his dogs on the foreigner (but they’re gone)
he calls out to the foreigner, give me money, leave my country, go home, then you’ll have a grave in the dirt
the portuguese man plays with his snakes, he tortures his dogs, he drowns a stray cat
he looks for a foreigner to scam out of his money, but they’re all gone, or they’re dead or they’re hiding
he dreams death is a master from Portugal

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  anonymous
 1 year ago
Out of consideration for the readers of this blog, I force myself to refrain from saying certain things that I would like to about Portugal, but after reading about the tragedy that you have suffered in that hellhole, and knowing that you are just one of many millions of foreign victims who have been brutally wronged and whose lives have been destroyed, I can no longer contain my enormous revolt and indignation, and so I say that Portugal, that criminal organization that only serves to make life easy for criminals at the expense of good people, should certainly, (in a hypothetically fair world, since we can’t turn to the true and legitimate judicial systems in our countries for justice), be the target of sanctions as well as a foreign military intervention to enforce the rule of law in that den full of criminals protected by other criminals, as it is the only way to bring justice to its endless victims and rescue all the billions of euros stolen from foreigners, and to minimally redeem the human lives destroyed in that damned country, which is absolutely useless to humanity. Fu*k you Portugal!

I wish from the bottom of my heart that you recover your life and your joy, because you are a human being with a capital H and therefore you will succeed because you have already come out of Satan’s pit, unlike the Portuguese rats who stole from you, under the cover of an even more criminal Portuguese State.

PS: It wouldn’t take more than a weekend with the pathetic army that they have -> US Says Portugal Buys “expensive And Useless Toys” Out Of “pride” And Inferiority Complexes

 Reply
leslie
 1 year ago
It looks like the truth about Portugal is finally starting to come out, and this is only the beginning

Look at this headline in the UK’s Daily Mail, about an Irish woman who retired to the Algarve:

“My dream retirement to Portugal became a nightmare when neighbour tried to steal my land, someone tried to ram my car off the road and my dog was tortured to death – I fear for my life”

https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-13163815/nightmare-neighbour-dog-tortured-death-steal-land-quit-City-new-life-Portugal-fear.html?ito=whatsapp_share_article-top

 Reply
Anja
 1 year ago
Anja, writing from Stockholm. I was there for 2 years, and I got scammed, so I left and will never return

It’s better to assume that everything in Portugal is a scam, and that everyone is in on it. Maybe the reality isn’t quite that bad, for example, maybe if you had to deal with 100 Portuguese concerning real estate transactions (rent, buy or sell), you might only get scammed 99 times, and one would turn out to be honest, unless that one exception was setting you up for an even bigger scam…. like for example, you buy a house and you get the keys and everything seems okay, so you’re congratulating yourself, thinking wow, they’re not all so dishonest here as everyone says they are, or am I just one of the lucky ones?

But then 4 months later the house collapses, killing you and all of your family, and there’s no mention of this anywhere in the news, so along comes the next unsuspecting foreigner into your town, where you and your family are still buried under rubble (because there’s never been an investigation and no one has even searched for the bodies), but here comes another clueless foreigner looking for another house to buy in the same town, from the same real estate agent

And it on and on it goes, until the truth finally starts to come out

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anja
 1 year ago
Absolutely right! The very concept of Portugal as a country governed by the rule of law is in itself a big lie and a giant scam, which serves above all to deceive unsuspecting private foreigners, as well as international organizations to continue sending billions of euros that only serve to fill the pockets of countless legalized Portuguese criminals.
Portugal is nothing more than a mafia entity to shelter its countless lowlife criminals so that they can do whatever they want and which in any other country would all be rotting in prison. Portugal, as an entity, is so profoundly disgusting and criminal that it should simply be abolished and completely ostracized by the world. But I think that sooner or later the world will wake up to the reality of this criminal organization called Portugal, or better said Poortugal, and then it will take the appropriate measures, I just hope it doesn’t take too long. Because it’s our money (and our lives that are being destroyed) by this aberration of a country.

 Reply
agent131711
 1 year ago
But are they human? That’s the question I keep asking myself

Or were they dropped off here in what is now called Portugal, hundreds, or perhaps thousands of years ago, by aliens from another planet, who did not want these creatures on their planet, so they dumped them on our planet. Like toxic waste

Perhaps it was some kind of genetic laboratory experiment that went horribly wrong, and so they had to get rid of it

And now look at the result…. It’s not a pretty sight!

 Reply
MissT
 1 year ago
Portuguese here, living in England for five years.. I love Portugal but in some points you are totally right, and it’s a shame.

 Reply
MANUEL CUNHA
 Reply to  MissT
 1 year ago
(Blog Author)
I apologize for letting this trash post such an eloquent response below, which I’ve translated, but it’s useful for readers of the blog to know the kind of creatures they very sadly find in such great abundance in Portugal, which is why Portugal is such a horrible place to live.

MANUEL CUNHA
If you’re Portuguese, I’m Martian… fuck you!
Se tu fores Portuguesa eu sou Marciano…vai-te foder!

 Reply
anonymous
 1 year ago
The Portuguese School

(before anyone tries to accuse me of defamation, the following is a work of fiction, and the author is anonymous)

Well, we had all these Portuguese children out planting trees, because we figured that . . . that was part of their education, to see how, you know, things grow, a sense of responsibility, taking care of things, being individually responsible. You know what I mean. And the trees all died

They were orange trees. I don’t know why they died, they just died. Something wrong with the soil possibly or maybe the stuff we got from the nursery wasn’t good. It wouldn’t have been so bad except that just a couple of weeks before the thing with the trees, the kittens all died.

But I think that the kittens, well, the reason that the kittens all died was the children’s parents were on strike for 2 weeks, so they couldn’t feed them, or give them water and that was explicable. It was something you could explain to the kids because of the strike. I mean, none of their parents would let them cross the picket line to feed the kittens, or give them water, and they knew there was a strike going on and what it meant. So when things got started up again and we found all these dead kittens they weren’t too upset.

With the herb gardens it was probably a case of over watering, and at least now they know not to over water. The children were very conscientious with the herb gardens and some of them probably . . . you know, slipped them a little extra water when we weren’t looking. Or maybe . . . well, I don’t like to think about sabotage, although it did occur to us. I mean, it was something that crossed our minds. We were thinking that way probably because before that the gerbils had all died, and the white mice had all died, and the salamander . . . well, now they know not to carry them around in plastic bags.

Of course we expected the tropical fish to die, that was no surprise. Just look at them crooked and they’re belly-up on the surface.

We weren’t even supposed to have puppies.
We weren’t even supposed to have the ten puppies,
but we had all these puppies, two of the children brought them to school with them because they said their parents had them chained up and were torturing the puppies at home, so we had all these puppies, and as soon as I saw them, I thought, Oh Christ, I bet they will live for about two weeks and then . . . And that’s what happened. They were all dead within 2 weeks

And then there was this Korean orphan that the class adopted through the Help the Children program, all the kids brought in 10 centimes a month, that was the idea. It was an unfortunate thing, the kid’s name was Kim and maybe we adopted him too late or something. The cause of death was not stated in the letter we got, they suggested we adopt another child instead and sent us some interesting case histories, but the second orphan died as well and the third, we didn’t have the heart to adopt another one after that.

We had extraordinary number of parents passing away as well, that year. For instance, there were I think four heart attacks and seven suicides, six drownings, and fourteen killed all together in different car accidents. One had a stroke. And we had the usual heavy mortality rate among the grandparents, or maybe it was heavier this year, it seemed so.

It’s been a strange year. I forgot to mention two of the parents, who were knifed to death while fighting with a masked intruder in their home.

The class took all of this pretty hard, they began (I think; nobody ever said anything to me directly) to feel that maybe there was something wrong with the school, or maybe even something wrong with Portugal….But I don’t think there’s anything wrong with the school, particularly, I’ve seen better and I’ve seen worse.

It was just an average year in a normal school in Portugal that just a run of bad luck. And of course, there’s nothing wrong with Portugal either, what happened was all the fault of the foreigners, and there was nothing we Portuguese could have done about it

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  anonymous
 1 year ago
Beyond horrific and comprehensible. I have no words! The hidden Portugal that the media and no one talks about.

 Reply
Jhon
 1 year ago
Portuguese people are really great manipulators. They lie, cheat, and treat you badly and somehow manage to make it all your fault.

 Reply
Mjsf
 1 year ago
I had to google why is my life miserable for the last 2 years and the reason is, I know now. I enjoy reading this because it’s kinda makes sense. Even the professors, the offices, the banks…. how a country move backwards.

 Reply
Amelia Earhart
 1 year ago
When I came to this country, my only response was, yes it’s okay (I had no I’ll will nor superior perspective).

After 6 years of living here, I feel I have a right to voice my experienced opinion (to those who care to know).

Portuguese people come from an extensive heritage of abuse. Abuse within the family structure derived from the acceptable dictative nature of communication.

97% of them walk around with giant chips on their shoulders. Thinking the world, and anybody they come across ows them (because poor old them had to suffer) so they will make you (the foreigner) suffer).

I have met many Portuguese people outside of Portugal. Some were horrible narcissists with massive chips on their shoulders and others were lovely individuals who were clearly victimised. But they all had one thing in common – none of them had any desire to move back to Portugal.

Portugal has one of the highest rates of qualified young people leaving the country (brain drain).
WHY DO GOOD EDUCATED PORTUGUESE PEOPLE LEAVE THEIR OWN COUNTRY AND NEVER RETURN??

Yes the economy is bad, but it is not the economy that drives good people away.
It is the Portuguese people themselves that drive people away.
Hypothetically, a bad economy opens various doors for new investors to bridge the gaps and improve the economy. Yet, new investors in Portugal suffer immensely and flea the country at a financial loss and psychological distress (fact).

Abuse and dictatorship within families are the main cause.
Narcissism has become the culture.
Everyone is only out for themselves.
There is no sense of community, and no sense of the good Samaritan.
Good morals mean nothing. It only matters how many connections you have (like the corrupt old boys club).

Here, people hate and report their neighbours. Everyone thinks they are better than the next guy and would literally proudly scream it at the top of their lungs. (Like competing animals on the discovery channel).

Like true narcissists, they pride themselves in the ignorance of foreigners who “simply believe them”. They get together, laugh and boast at how they have “ripped off” another foreigner…how stupid the foreigner was, and how they deserved to be ripped off due to their stupidity. (Foreigners call this trust your lawyer, doctor, account…as they are a registered business – supposedly reputable).

The majority of Portuguese people have no morals and integrity. The only morals that seem to matter to them, is how much money you have, and your public profile.
Like true narcissists they are only interested in your projected image and what you can “give” them. Money and connections to “important” people.
They are not shy to admit that these two points are the only points that matter in life.

They openly accept that you are either a king or a servant. (In their opinions), if you are a king, you can be the biggest ruthless, soulless asshole ever. If you are a servant, you have no right to live, think and speak.
They all accept this reality and they ALL STRIVE TO (ONE DAY) BECOME THE RUTHLESS SOULLESS ASSHOLE.

This is not a democratic mindset.
Portugal is not a democratic society.

Discrimination and racism is not considered as discrimination and racism. They will be happy to tell you “this is how things work in Portugal”…”if you don’t like it go back to your country”. They don’t seem to understand the concept. Because according to them, you will never be on “their level” you will always be treated subservient…as is normal…’cause “you should be lucky that they even allowed you to live here”.
(Btw, being from a 1st world country, living in this 5th world country, changes nothing).

Portuguese people are master manipulators in “flipping -the-script”, confusion, gaslighting, intimidation and faking it.
If you ever see a Portuguese person (in Portugal) smile = they are conning you/ripping you off.
They are severely unhappy people who derive pleasure out of making others suffer.
Like a true narcissist they will absolutely justify their every con and will absolutely never admit fault.
They constantly complain and point fingers and never ever accept responsibility for anything.

It is the result of centuries of abusive narcissistic dictatorship. It has engraved itself upon the Portuguese gene to such an extent that it has become the culture itself.

The new generations, educated, are fleeing the country, without any desire to return.

Alcoholism, Domestic Violence, Narcissism, and the refusal to change “tradition”, when alcoholism, domestic violence and narcissism is the tradition, will continue to deter everyone (educated Portuguese and foreigners) until the cycle is stopped.

Perhaps after 30/40 years the good Portuguese people will be able to return to Portugal, after all the toxic, evil people have died out and they will be able to rebuild a new, democratic, educated Portugal.
But then again, will the viscous cycle of abusive behaviour ever die out when it is so deeply engrained in the culture itself.

Since the day I arrived in this country (due to a con), I have been praying to leave.
I’ve been a prisoner here, not leaving my home (anymore), having no friends, no community, no cause…for 6 years already…
Fighting a legal battle to send 3 individuals to prison.
I will not give up!

Please do not fall into this honey trap.
It truly is a psychological hell on earth.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Amelia Earhart
 1 year ago
Thank you very much for your testimony and thoughts. I send you my deepest sympathy, and I very much hope that you will be able to free yourself from that hell, and I believe that you will, even though I know it’s all very complicated, but your life and your happiness are certainly much more important than all the evil that exists in Portugal! How I understand you… Portugal is a complete desert of humanity, we are always truly alone as we can’t trust anyone.

 Reply
anon
 1 year ago
If you find yourself in Portugal, for whatever reason, there are only 2 rules:

(1) trust no one, while planning your escape from hell

(2) once you’re out of there, if you know any non-Portuguese who are still trapped in that hell, do whatever is possible within your means, to try and help them escape, and to help them rejoin the human race

 Reply
Ricardo
 1 year ago
Perfect, just stay in your perfect country.
No one is asking you to come here.
I wish there were more websites like this.

 Reply
Linda Aune
 Reply to  Ricardo
 1 year ago
Say that to TapAir or the owners of thousands of vaccation homes listed. But hey, according to you TapAir are willing to fly back and forth without passengers, and the owners do not care less if their houses are empty.
All this work for nothing, cause hey, you do not want us here? 🥴

 Reply
Joao Silva
 1 year ago
This is all lies

I am portuguese and this is all slander and offensive, I live in America now come over and say this nonsense to my face

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Joao Silva
 1 year ago
Joao, you are the perfect example of why this site is called POORtugalSCUM. So according to your supreme intelligence and superior moral values as an emigrated half-wit Portuguese, everything that is said here is a lie!! What I write, the testimonies, most of them extremely tragic, of the commentators, including the decent Portuguese, the translated news about the fraud and rampant megalomaniac corruption, the covert dictatorship, etc… Therefore, according to your excellence as a half-wit Portuguese… We’re all big liars!!! You’re a genius!!

Poor you… You talk, you talk, but you’d flee like the rat you are! I’ve been “legally” robbed by many Portuguese shits like you who aren’t even worth the oxygen they breathe, but who are very well protected by other shits within the deeply corrupt and useless Portuguese courts! You can be sure I’d love to hear you open your filthy mouth in front of me, not even your mother would recognize you…

The Portuguese as a whole are certainly the most coward people on earth! I feel sorry for the poor Americans who have to put up with a piece of dung like you, but they’ve probably spotted you a long time ago! Fortunately, the Portuguese emigrants won’t all be like you.

 Reply
Joao Silva
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Internet tough guy, I challenge you to a fight at rough and rowdy, if you have the balls to accept. You little pussy. Online tough guy pussy boy. I’ll smack you with this linguicia mandingo across the face

 Reply
Tony
 Reply to  Joao Silva
 1 year ago
You are an idiot, a real Portuguese moron, confirming what is told here about the likes of you, well done

 Reply
Rory
 Reply to  Joao Silva
 1 year ago
The blog author is an old female. Do you wanna try with me gorilla?
I live in San Diego

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Joao Silva
 1 year ago
The author is 100 % right. I have been many times in Portugal. I never experienced a more despressive, dishonest, jealous and primitive and corrupt people. and I have been around in this world. They do not deserve it to be in the EU. Read all the comments here. Every one is fed up with your country

 Reply
Joao Silva
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Your mother is probably ashamed of the discrimination people are facing from her migrant fat Virgin son who made a blog bashing a whole country because he had to use his right hand because he is so disgusting that portugese women in the shops couldn’t even stomach saying your welcome to your ugly ass when you buy your cheese

 Reply
Vasco
 Reply to  Joao Silva
 1 year ago
bacano portugal mete nojo, tu ate te puseste a milhas ganha nocao!!

 Reply
Rory
 Reply to  Joao Silva
 1 year ago
Learn to write porkandcheese

 Reply
Maria Peixinho
 Reply to  Joao Silva
 1 year ago
João Silva, tu fazes com que todos nós fiquemos mal vistos. Está literalmente a provar o ponto de vista do autor. Por favor, seja educado nas suas respostas.

 Reply
Tony
 Reply to  Maria Peixinho
 1 year ago
Exactamente

 Reply
Sarah Inconnue
 1 year ago
I also got scammed, 2 years ago in Lisbon, and I lost a lot of money

But what doesn’t kill you, makes you stronger.

And I learned a lot from this terrible experience.

I learned that …. in the Portuguese mind, it’s always the foreigner who causes every problem in the country. If a foreigner didn’t cause the problem, he was certainly planning it, and if he wasn’t planning it, he was thinking of it, and if the foreigner wasn’t thinking of causing the problem, he would have thought of it.

So any way these stupid creatures look at it, every problem in Portugal is always the fault of the foreigner, one way or another, never the fault of their own corrupt government, or their criminal real estate agents, or their criminal lawyers, etc etc… no, in their mind, it’s never the fault of Portuguese people.

I was there, for 3 years of living hell, but now that I have escaped that country of con artists and criminals, I’m finally starting to recover from the trauma, and learning to live again, back in my own country, France, a country with many serious problems, but here there are also many good people, and that’s what makes all the difference. Here there are people you can trust and turn to for help, whenever you need it. There is no comparison between the majority of French people, and most of the Portuguese that it was my misfortune to encounter

And there’s no comparison between the two countries. I only wish I had known this before, and never left

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Sarah Inconnue
 1 year ago
I’m very sorry to hear that.

It’s a great truth: what doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.
Portugal is without any doubt, in its overwhelming majority (not all), simply a disgusting country to live in, full of criminals/crooks and losers, who are therefore incapable of admitting their faults, cowardly leaning against each other.
Portugal’s days are numbered, the mask is falling, Portugal and the behavior of the the vast majority of Portuguese is not compatible with the 21st century, their mentality and (lack of) humanity never evolved beyond the Stone Age.

Indeed, in Portugal you NEVER get any real help, more so when the situations are serious, you only find profiteers/crooks/imbeciles eager to take another bite of you (including the fraudulent public institutions, such as the abhorrent and criminal mob that lurks with total impunity within the Portuguese “justice” system protected by a very convenient sovereign).
Portugal is like nothing else in the world, in a very, very demoniac way. A dictatorship disguised as a democracy, and it couldn’t be any other way since Portugal is full of nasty Portuguese people. For the same, or much worse reasons that democracy doesn’t work in Africa, it doesn’t and never will work in Portugal either. Because they’re Portuguese.

I agree 100% with everything you’ve said. Very good points.

 Reply
Seashells
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
this site an excellent demonstration of why speech should be free. In my opinion, Portugal might be better of if it ditched the language and adopted English as its official language

“Operation Stork (“Operação Cegonha”) was a broad initiative under the authoritarian Salazar regime in Portugal, focused on the removal of children from families considered politically undesirable.”… https://www.pedrasdelrei.org/blog/operao-cegonha-in-2024

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Seashells
 1 year ago
Ironically, the Portuguese language itself, which is not understood by the masses in the civilized world, and in general, with the exception of about half a dozen African countries, two Asian regions and the huge country of Brazil, is guaranteed to be one of the factors that contributes most decisively to hiding from the civilized world the countless scandals and flagrant violations of the most basic human and democratic rights that happen with frightening regularity on a daily basis in that hellhole, totally taken over by criminals who go unpunished for life and populated by a population that is generally of very malicious character.

That’s why it is so important to have sources of information from abroad (such as our two modest small personal blogs, which already help, at least that’s my hope), totally independent of Portugal and its conniving mentality, that report and warn on this covert dictatorship that is Portugal, in the ubiquitous English language, but also in many other languages if possible. Portugal has never been, is not, and will never be a democracy, given the very deviant, brainwashed and totally disinterested mentality of the overwhelming majority of the Portuguese people when it comes to everything that goes so wrong in their country, and who also have no interest at all in the world. The Portuguese really are the perfect people to live under their beloved dictatorships, whichever side they come from.

In general, the Portuguese love dictators and people with dictator tics, what they don’t like at all is democracy, for in their dumb, crooked minds they think they’ll be better “served”.

 Reply
Marco Matias
 1 year ago
I’m Portuguese and you’re 100% right!!! I left this country 4 years ago and I will never go back to this place of primitive people, NEVER!!! I was scammed when buying a house, the judge’s crook proved right to the thieves from the construction company who had been carrying out this scheme for years. I came to Germany, I’m very happy here, my advice is: don’t waste a day of your life and your health in that SHIT country, full of envious and primitive people loaded with inferiority and vengeful complexes.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Marco Matias
 1 year ago
You did very well to get out of that hellhole! Exactly as you described, that’s day-to-day life in the Portuguese pseudo-democracy and it was exactly what happened to me too, but in another area. Portuguese pseudo-justice and pseudo-judges very often side with the criminals (for many obscure reasons, or not at all) or produce outrageously unjust and humiliating sentences against the victims out of sheer meanness. Due to these reasons, the scary truth is that in Portugal it really is legal to steal, because, in one way or another, actively or by connivance, everyone on the “ladder of power” is in on it!
This is why Portugal is in fact a dictatorship, since everything, especially the Portuguese State, turns out to be deeply corrupt, evil, incompetent and pretentious. Needless to say, it is an extremely dangerous “country” to live in, because all the endemic rot is so concealed, and when one find out, it is already too late.

 Reply
Bab
 1 year ago
Four years ago, I migrated to this sewer with great enthusiasm, and from the very first months, the harassment started, and I always thought about what I did to be mistreated so much, and I tried. Each day they do better than the previous day, but unaware that these stupid creatures are only taking revenge, a revenge that is rooted in their cultural poverty and the shortcomings of their lives. I just want to get out of this swamp as soon as possible. Even hearing the sound of this garbage is annoying

 Reply
Portugone
 1 year ago
I found this website by randomly googling “why are Portuguese people so exhausting”. That was just on my mind today.

A lot of what’s written here clearly comes from a place of hurt and outrage, and, being Portuguese myself, I fully share the sentiment. As the saying goes, Portugal is a wonderful country, unfortunately, it’s full of Portuguese people.

A couple of things to note, however.

Portuguese society is indeed predicated on mediocrity. But Portuguese people are well aware of this. You’re incorrect to believe we don’t complain about the state of the nation, in fact, that’s all we complain about!

Because mediocrity walks hand in hand with inferiority, the Portuguese will never admit this to a foreigner. That’s where the “we’re the best!” mentality comes from, deep awareness of our inability to achieve anything meaningful and an immense fear of being found out. If you’re a foreigner in Portugal, you’ll be treated very nicely, just know that Portuguese people do this to fish for compliments about our climate, our food or how nice we are, as insecure people seek validation constantly. Know also that if you criticize Portugal in any way, you’ll immediately become persona non grata, even though we complain about the exact same things you’ve just criticized.

We’re still experiencing the effects of fascism, in a way. We’re an unsophisticated, servile people. The social order changed a little but most of the pieces are still in place. People are educated now (not that long ago Portugal had an 80% illiteracy rate) but the system is so mediocre, students are discouraged from thinking critically. You’ll be much more successful sucking up to your teachers and later your bosses, than pointing out the system’s points of failure. Every tall poppy shall be decapitated!

You’re 100% correct that the Portuguese are a miserable, jealous people. Even with this many hours of sunlight, over half the country is running on antidepressants. I’m currently working at a large company. There was a meeting with our European counterparts to share what everyone is working on. After the meeting, the Portuguese promptly patted themselves on the back as being the best in show, but not before commenting how the other team who are researching the same topic had a terrible presentation and basically had nothing of worth to show. Of course, the official discourse is “we love collaborating and sharing knowledge with our European colleagues”. Portuguese people are such frauds. And there’s no such thing as meritocracy here. There’s a culture of secrecy and withholding information, first, so no one can see how shoddy your work is; second, so you become indispensable and less likely to be fired. Companies talk about “retaining talent” but they’d rather keep lazy, incompetent obstructionists, than workers who are productive, share knowledge within the company and strive to optimize processes. If you’re a woman, then you’re also subjected to humbling treatment, lest you think your hard work will better your career in any way.

Yes, at work and in social circles, as many foreigners realize, it’s quite difficult to make friends here. Even among the Portuguese, most relationships are incredibly superficial and you can never really trust anyone. These people will smile to your face and bad-mouth you behind your back, while actually believing you’re doing the exact same to them. They think that’s the expected, normal behavior.

Portuguese people are deeply antisocial. That’s why there’s such a disregard for the law and other people’s rights. The laws themselves are written so the average (objectively not so smart) person won’t understand them. If you’re fighting for your rights, you can counterpoint every legal objection to the point where you’ll no longer get an answer. In the end the system isn’t meant to be accessed (growing up, “Before the Law” was one of my favorite stories and I swear, Joseph K. was part Portuguese).

We complain about corruption but will soil our hands for the most insignificant things. We’re actually jealous of the big fish, if only we could steal as much as them! There’s nothing a Portuguese person enjoys as much as feeling they’ve pulled a fast one on someone. In a country where most people barely graduate their secondary education, that’s one way to feel smart, I guess.

I should’ve left years ago, but where would I go now? I feel like a stranger in my own country. Maybe it’s not too late. Thanks for sharing your frustration with Portugal and her people… it echoes my own experience in many ways. Sometimes it feels like I’m being gaslit by an entire nation.

 Reply
Vasco
 Reply to  Portugone
 1 year ago
Wow! Sou portugues e concordo totalmente. Sempre me senti um ET aqui neste pais totalmente delusional e ridiculo!!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Portugone
 1 year ago
Thank you very much for taking the time to contribute to this blog with your insightful, thorough and above all sincere commentary on what constitutes the real problems of Portugal and the Portuguese.
In Portugal, the decent, sane and most capable people are the ones who are punished, whether they are foreigners or even Portuguese of course, by a society in which the overwhelming majority are conniving with evil, in its many varied forms, or at best are totally indifferent, which in the end brings the same gravity to the dreadful and immutable situation. The disproportion between good and evil in Portugal is unbearable!

I can see that you are a very capable and decent person, and therefore deserve much more. I very much hope that you find your way, even better outside Portugal, but I understand, it’s not easy, but as the saying goes, when there’s a will there’s a way. All the best to you!

 Reply
anon48
 1 year ago
One day I was out walking in the forest, when I heard portuguese voices so I ran up to the nearby rise. Hiding in the bushes, I was horrified to see some village boys chasing a dog through the field.

Running frantically, the dog tried to reach the safety of the forest. But portuguese boys threw rocks, bricks,and pieces of wood, in front of it to cut it off. The dog weakened, its leaps shortened and slowed. The boys finally caught it, but it bravely continued to struggle and to bite. Then the portuguese boys, bending over the animal, poured some liquid from a can on it. Feeling that something horrible was about to be done, I tried desperately to think of some way to save this poor little dog. But it was too late.

One of the boys took a piece of smoldering wood out of the can slung over his shoulder and touched the animal with it. Then he threw the dog to the ground where it immediately burst into flames. With a squeal that stopped my breath it leapt up as if to escape from the fire. The flames covered it; only the dog’s tail still wagged for a second. The small smoking body rolled on the ground and was soon still.

The portuguese boys looked on, laughing hysterically, and prodding dead animal with a stick.

Just another day in the life in Portugal.

Counting the hours, and the minutes, until I can get the hell out of this nightmare land

 Reply
Rory
 Reply to  anon48
 1 year ago
God where was that?

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  anon48
 1 year ago
Pure evil!! They should have been the ones to be scorched! This is the hidden Portugal.

 Reply
anonymous
 1 year ago
The following article, about missing persons, or people who disappear in Portugal, was copied and pasted from the Portugal Resident

The focus in the article below is on Jean Tighe, a 38 year old Irish woman who went missing on 13 July 2020 from Parede, on the Cascais line in Lisbon

So it’s not only the scam and fraud and corruption that is everywhere, it’s even worse….rape and murder…. Portugal is not safe, women disappear, they are never found, there is no investigation, the media doesn’t cover it, and no one here knows anything about these missing people…

Article is below, with a link to Portugal Resident, at the end. Click in the link and look at Jean Tighe’s innocent face, This young woman should never have come to Portugal, but no one warned her, she didn’t know, and so she thought it was safe:

“The PJ list of missing persons doesn’t even mention some of them; in fact doesn’t feature a number of ‘notable missing people’, like two of the men who went missing in Madeira in the past couple of years (Benoit Way and Darren Kay); the Lagos chef (Jon Anderson Edwards/ Balion) who seemingly vanished into thin air in 2014, and the Irish woman who left a hostel in Parede (Cascais) during lockdown and who has also disappeared without trace.

As few stories focus on the number of ‘missing people who are also missing from the PJ list of missing people’, there are scant explanations for these lapses.

In the case of the Irish woman, Jean Tighe, it has been claimed that ‘she might want to be missing’ – hence why very little publicity seems to have been given to the incident in the ‘early days’ (in the summer of 2020). It is an attitude that has been publicly lamented by the family who were not even made aware of their loved one’s disappearance until months after Jean walked out of the Help Yourself hostel, leaving behind her passport, clothes, money, keys and one mobile phone.

Since then, the family – particularly 38-year-old Jean’s sister Leona – have pushed for a great deal more in the way of active investigation. “ It is clear to us, especially in the context of the time lapse, that Jean’s disappearance has never been fully investigated”, says an emotional post on social media, placed roughly two weeks ago

Leona Tighe has since been actively following up leads herself. With the help of Expresso reporter Micael Pereira she has been in Portugal recently. Eye witness reports, encouraged by the recent social media campaign, included a possible sighting in Madeira, another in Lisbon. Tragically, both led nowhere, but Leona has stressed she has been buoyed up by the fact that people are, finally, responding to the information about Jean Tighe’s disappearance.

“It means there are people aware and keen to help”, she tells Expresso. “That is what we need, for people to help us find my sister”.

Adding to the puzzle

Adding to the mystery of Jean Tighe’s vanishing is that her own Facebook page has shown “some signs of activity since she disappeared on July 13, 2020”.

Says the latest Expresso story: “An ex-boyfriend, called Klaus, has told police that he tried to call the Irish woman on February 23, 2021 through Facebook Messenger. No one answered, but the notification of this unanswered call was read on Messenger a few weeks later (March 15) by someone with access to Jean’s account.”

In previous stories, Expresso has referred to the mobile phone left behind at the Help Yourself hostel: it was found by a hostel ‘volunteer’, but it was never handed in to police with the rest of Jean’s personal effects. No one seems to know what happened to it. The hotel volunteer has also ‘disappeared from the map’, according to the paper – but whoever has it has accessed messages at various points in 2020 and 2021.

Another twist to the story is the fact that the former boyfriend, Sheu Quitamba, who first reported Jean missing to Portuguese police, has since been found dead in his apartment in Alcabideche (not far from Parede).

His body was discovered on the floor of his kitchen on December 28 last year. “According to a police source there were no signs that he had been the victim of murder”, said Expresso in January. “And although there has still not been an autopsy report, authorities point to probable cause of death being a major heart attack, related to problems with alcohol that he had had for several years”.

There are other ‘loose ends’ – possibly unsurprising considering the lack of interest by authorities to tackle this case in its early days.

“The minimum standard for a missing person’s investigation does not appear to have been followed here, given the significant array of open issues outlined above. We feel that, because of the initial communication issues between authorities, and the subsequent time lapse before the family became aware of the disappearance, Jean’s case was largely ignored in Portugal, and neither Irish nor Portuguese authorities have shown any great appetite to either admit their prior failures or, more importantly, to start anew and launch the investigation which should have been launched in July 2020, with the urgency which any affected family in any country would reasonably expect”, said Leona in her social media posting of last month.

“We need to get the Portuguese police and the Irish authorities to work together and investigate Jean’s disappearance”, she continued; Expresso’s latest report suggests this is at last happening on a Portuguese level.

“In January this year, the public prosecutions office sent a request to Meta (Facebook’s parent company), and to authorities in Ireland”, says the paper.

Meantime, Jean Tighe’s family reinforces the need to keep this investigation alive: “We would like for everyone to keep sharing Jean’s Facebook page because we need to highlight what is not being done within the investigation. At the very least, we hope to ensure that these endemic failures in cross-border judicial communication and cooperation are not revisited on another Irish family in future”.

Jean was a traveller

According to an article in the Irish independent, “Jean was a seasoned traveller and it was not unusual for her to travel solo all over the world. She had suffered from mental health difficulties in the past, Leona said, but she does not believe her sister took her own life”. This belief appears to have been backed up by Leona’s subsequent meeting with the chief of police in Cascais (close to Parede). She told the Independent: “He said 99pc of people who take their own lives by going into the sea, their bodies are recovered. There have been murders in Parede and we have always had fears she went to meet someone, not realising they were dangerous. But we just don’t know”.

https://www.portugalresident.com/tragedy-of-missing-brits-who-dont-even-figure-on-missing-persons-listings/

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  anonymous
 1 year ago
Thank you for your contribution. Terribly, it’s absolutely true, in fact, in Portugal it’s frighteningly normal for many rapes, murders and kidnappings to take place, most of which are never (properly) solved or known about, because the authorities, in typical Portuguese fashion, are not interested in or empathetic towards their fellow human beings. Portugal is a totally inhumane and cold society and this is absolutely transversal and reflected at all levels. Not only are foreigners treated with such contempt (or perhaps even more so), but also the Portuguese themselves. Take the case of the 11-year-old Portuguese child, Rui Pedro, who disappeared many years ago, in which even with all the media coverage at the time and to this day, the authorities acted in a totally disastrous and blatantly uncaring manner, and to this day his poor mother suffers from excruciating pain that has physically turned her into a walking corpse.

It should be remembered that in Portugal, the official statistics published on practically everything are, in general and especially on serious and important issues, extremely distorted and tend to be deceivingly very flattering to Portugal. For example, it seems to me that crime, such as rapes of foreign women in Portugal in tourist areas like the Algarve, is much higher than it is officially reported, due to the fact that most criminal cases are basically shelved and disappear into total anonymity.

 Reply
Kass
 1 year ago
Horribly jealous, Scammers, traitor, etc. you can’t use the word human for these creatures. Don’t waste your time in this dirty country.

 Reply
erika
 1 year ago
Remax is by far the largest real estate agency in Portugal.

Look at some of these reviews of Remax/Portugal on Trustpilot.

92 percent of reviewers give Remax/Portugal only 1 star, the lowest rating possible, with many of them saying the entire company is a total scam, their real estate agents are all pathological liars, and they would give the company 0 stars if they could

Here are just 3 reviews of Remax/Portugal, just to give you an idea

(1) Diabolical.

They lied and exploited our situation and even tried to charge us a fee without selling the flat. They put the wrong bank details for the transaction. Ultimately we were ground down to a state where we sold our flat after 6 months for less than what it was worth.

The most incompetent and disingenuous services company I have ever dealt with.

(2) These guys are absolutely the worst. Not just worst but evil. They will lie, manipulate and screw you while smiling in your face! I dealt with them in Algarve, Setubal, Montijo and Lisbon. All different realtors but do the same dirt. I would put a minus star if I could.

(3) The worst company in portugal

The worst company in portugal. behavior of the agents , i had contact with about 16 expect of 3 women, is a fkn dissaster and reminds me of the 80/90s in germany. this guys are all fukup. You @remax, you are a shame and you destroy the dreams of many many people.
worst thing, you also destroying the reputation of portugal. i wanted to spend more the 400k in 3 steps.
you dont want my small money, you never get the big money
ppl hate u, ask any portuguis
Take care if you are in contact with an Artur. If you r his customer kick him

It goes on and on like this with many of the reviewers saying they were scammed by Remax/Portugal and that the entire company is a scam

Here is the Trustpilot link for reviews of Remax Portugal:
https://www.trustpilot.com/review/www.remax.pt

 Reply
MANUEL CUNHA
 Reply to  erika
 1 year ago
Honestly, every country has its problems, but for God’s sake, taking isolated cases and saying what those frustrated idiots come here to say, my goodness, if I go to England, France, Italy, Germany, and live there for a while, I will certainly find reasons to dislike them too. But honestly, taking this and labeling a country based on isolated cases smells like foolish xenophobia… you, the author, must have had a horrible experience in Portugal, go get yourself treated, you must be some crazy frustrated person, go to the doctor, you xenophobic and crazy person! You and all the others who come here to say shit, even the Portuguese!

 Reply
Anon
 Reply to  MANUEL CUNHA
 1 year ago
Charming, hurt, little Portuguese brain. I’m so happy this is being exposed. I hope that country gets the real media attention it deserves. This is the awakening.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  MANUEL CUNHA
 1 year ago
Manuel Cunha,

1. Only an imbecile Portuguese full of inferiority complexes would dare to compare pathetic Poortugal with Germany, France, England and Italy!!! Portugal and the Portuguese in general have much more to do with the mentality of African countries than Europe, which is just a geographical coincidence and absolutely nothing more, and that’s why democracy doesn’t work and never will in Portugal and is, in practice, a dictatorship.
2. Being serial robbed, in my case of 130.00 euros, by all the relevant players in a Portuguese society of installed criminals, both civilian, state and the justice system itself, and having lost 6 years of my life to a living nightmare, is just having a bad experience?!! When there are literally thousands of people who have been and continue to be harmed even more than I have, both foreigners and Portuguese.
3. Isolated cases?! All the news, which unfortunately not even 1% of reality covers, about rampant corruption and collusion between politics and the judicial system that protects “legalized” criminals from all walks and most varied professions in Portugal, “Mr. Realtor!”, in which 1% of that would have made any other country catch fire a long time ago, and the infinite human tragedies, both of the painful testimonies on this site, which are 1 in millions of human tragedies, but which unfortunately we will never hear about, as well as the news translated on this site, which only cover 1% of the crimes committed in that shithole, from Portuguese news sites, are therefore, in your wise scumbag Portuguese words, just isolated cases?!!
4. Thank you for confirming what we all already know about the tremendous lack of character and typical callousness of the Portuguese people in general. Poortuguese like you are the reason why this site is called POORtugalSCUM

Poortugal’s days are numbered, Poortugal is a putrid society littered from top to bottom with criminals who “operate” with total impunity. Finally the world is finding out, much to your fear, wonder why?

 Reply
MANUEL CUNHA
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Tell me, are you a normal person, or are you some frustrated individual who invents names to come here and denigrate Portugal? And then you come with that sad phrase, “oh, it’s clear from your writing what the Portuguese are like”? If I were to describe what you say about the Portuguese? The insane hatred with which you treat all Portuguese would suggest that you are a disgusting being, a rat, petty, miserable, a wretch, a lifeless being, an outcast, a miserable little shit. You don’t even have the courage to put a name on the blog, you must be from a wonderful country, right? You must be disgusted with yourself, that’s why you hide behind a crappy blog! Get another way of life, you worthless piece of shit, go work, you lazy bum? Oh, and you certainly aren’t European, Europeans are not like you, by the smell of your blog, you must be from a shitty country!!!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  erika
 1 year ago
What goes on in that company is the perfect portrait of how all of Poortugal works, including the State institutions, to a greater or lesser degree. Disgraceful “country”!
That is why I say that Portugal could only be fixed with the intervention of a foreign army (to implement the justice and values of a true rule of law country), if that were possible.

 Reply
Yvonne
 1 year ago
There should be signs at every Spanish border crossing into Portugal:

“Warning! European culture and civilization ends here! You are entering a primitive society of savages and stone age barbarians. Your life is at risk if you proceed. Turn back!”

 Reply
Sam
 Reply to  Yvonne
 1 year ago
Lol 😅 I was thinking the exact same thing! Just with the wording “welcome to hell”

 Reply
Fau
 Reply to  Yvonne
 1 year ago
😂👍

 Reply
José Queiroz
 1 year ago
Who pay you to write all that? None of this is true. If you don’t like it then leave, simple as. Fucking idiot!!!

 Reply
Tony
 Reply to  José Queiroz
 1 year ago
Who pay you….Typical Portuguese thinking, must involve money…no moron, it’s about reality, something you clearly know nothing about

 Reply
Eio
 Reply to  José Queiroz
 1 year ago
Portugees are mostly dishonest, racist cowards. I see allot Brazilian people entering. I am actually like the Brazilians more. And I hope they keep coming until the Portuguese will be burried with them. And other cultures, it will be a healthy change.

 Reply
Nameless
 Reply to  Eio
 7 months ago
Brazilian here. The Brazilians are more extroverted and friendly, but make no mistake, they are just as corrupt as the Portuguese. Especially Cariocas(people from RJ). We just elected a convicted criminal for presidency two years ago. These stereotypes about dumb Brazilians/Portuguese are true. Cowardice, jealousy, lack of ambition, incompetence, laziness, dishonesty… There is a reason most English colonies became first world nations and the Portuguese/Spanish ones did not: CULTURE! The British have a superior culture. It’s not about geography, resources or genes. It’s about culture. Brazilian culture is mental retardation and masochism. Families treat their kids like shit, schools teach kids to be socialists/communists, people don’t want to own businesses, but instead want to slave away for the government by becoming public servants, college students only learn the minimum to get their degrees, nobody ever supports your decisions to pursue your dreams, rich or successful people are the target of envy and violence, promiscuous men and women, interpersonal relations are all fake, fucking medieval violence and criminality all fucking day…Brazil is just an evil place, full of mentally ill people and ruled by a even more homicidal and criminal elite. My advice: stay away from Brazil.

 Reply
Fau
 Reply to  José Queiroz
 1 year ago
Truths are always painful specially for the people’s in you level.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  José Queiroz
 1 year ago
Poortuguese like you are the reason why this site is called PoortugalSCUM. Your very “honest” and “intelligent” words perfectly prove everything I say on this site about the endemic crookedness and genetic retardness of the vast majority of Portuguese people (but not all), which is why your country is doomed to disappear, which it WILL. We are in the 21st century and you little Portuguese have never left the Stone Age.

Every day that you wake up and look at your ugly mug in the mirror, YOU KNOW that the undeniable truth is that you were born a SHITTY LOSER and that’s HOW you’re going to die, and the sooner the better.

SCUMBAGS like you have no place in this world, José! Now make us all a favor and DROP DEAD YOU PIECE OF EXCREMENT!

 Reply
Yvonne
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
You nailed it!

Nothing in Portugal is what it appears to be. It’s all a scam, based on lies.

Thank you for all the work you’ve done on this site. As far as Portugal is concerned, this is the most truthful website I’ve found anywhere on the Internet.

 Reply
Fau
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
You are Absolutely right 👍

 Reply
Allen
 1 year ago
Thanks for your blog, you are 100% right about Portugal, and this blog is a great service by trying to warn others to stay away from Portugal, or get the hell out if they are living there

On the Facebook group “Leaving Portugal: Speaking Candidly “they are currently discussing the extreme animal cruelty in Portugal

Here are just 6 out of many comments concerning cruelty to animals by Portuguese savages (without giving any names of the commenters)

(1) Portugal is the only nation in Western Europe without an enforceable animal anti-cruelty law now. One was finally passed in 2014 but it’s been ruled unconstitutional. It’s literally backwards. Might want to keep that in mind.

(2) Even the cows are mistreated. They are never milked. Now they have mastitis and tumours and are in terrible pain. Yet every morning they force them out into the field with their tractor making them run even though their front feet are tethered to their neck by a rope and they can’t lift their heads up. This is supposed to be a religious country. Why don’t they treat them all as Gods creatures then!! For the record I’m not religious at all.

(3) We arrived in Portugal with our four rescue dogs. Two have since passed due to old age.
We currently have 13 dogs.
Two cats
Three ducks
Two sheep and 10 chickens.
All cats and dogs were abandoned. We rescued them all off various streets or from situations that were dire. We’ve also rehomed two in the last month, thankfully, as we’d have been up to 15…
If, like us, you’re an animal lover and you genuinely care for their wellbeing (many people like to say they care, but when it comes to the crunch they turn a blind eye) Portugal isn’t for you. We’re out of here once our house is sold and we’re taking all the dogs with us.
In the meantime we’ve started a charity to help, as we simply can’t afford them all. But we’d rather eat baked potatoes each night and feed them well than turn them away due to a lack of funds.

(4) It is the number one reason I am leaving Portugal. I can’t stand it. It’s everywhere. I’m surrounded by animals on chains, starving strays, and the Portuguese people who simply don’t care. As a dog owner and animal lover I just can’t deal with it.

(5) Stay away from Portugal if you don’t want to see chained dogs on a daily basis and some other horrific situations.

And finally this one, some Portuguese monster killed her dog:

(6) I ended up rescuing 2. As I already had 2 rescue dogs I transported one to a friend in Ireland and paid another serious amount of money to a vet to look after the other one, who died of kidney failure within 6 months. I wanted to have the second dog put down – but the vet didn’t. Too lucrative. Since then, I purposefully turn a blind eye. Then in November I found my beautiful Henry floating dead in a well. It was not an accident – it was another warning to me. I ended up being treated for PTSD. I am a toughie – but having to use a drone operator after searching for him for nearly a week really tortured me. I still have nightmares about it.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Allen
 1 year ago
I made the comment about the 13 dogs, plus most of the others are mine too. This place is a hellhole. if we had more money we’ve have a hundred or more! There’s a great new group called Portugal Propaganda – The truth about living here. The admins are very strict and it safe place to vent and be heard, anonymously if you wish. The lady whose dog Henry was murdered, is my friend. Her own Portuguese lawyer advised her to get a gun to defend herself as nothing else will work here.

Last edited 1 year ago by Anonymous
 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Allen
 1 year ago
Thank you very much for your comment and the heartbreaking information, which is unfortunately very real in Portugal.
These terrible stories you tell us are very common practice in Portugal, with even more incidence in deepest Portugal, where these monsters of “people” are even more at ease to commit these atrocities on poor defenseless animals.

The Portuguese already treat each other so badly, imagine how they will treat defenseless animals. Nothing shows a person’s wickedness and lack of character more than the way they treat animals.

Even if there were a good law in Portugal for the protection of animals, the laws in Portugal are never enforced anyway.

Religion for the overwhelming majority of Portuguese is just used as a “very convenient to wear” cloak, but without any deep meaning and at the same time mixed with beliefs in witchcraft. In my opinion, being a decent person with good feelings has nothing to do with whether or not you follow a religion. You’re either a decent person or you’re not.

I am very touched by all your kindness and the love you give to all those animals you care for at such personal sacrifice, but I imagine that the return they give you in happiness is also very great 🙂

Portugal is a “country” full of malicious people with serious chronic and genetic mental disorders, which, of course, are also reflected in the inhumane way in which many Portuguese treat their animals. Portugal is definitely not a country for sane people to live in; on the contrary, Portugal is an extremely toxic country, for so many reasons.

I wish you all the best.

 Reply
aklanoid
 1 year ago
I live in Paris and an old Portuguese man who was manspreading on public transit punched me (a woman) when I asked him to kindly move and also to stop yelling into his phone in the quiet car. Also my friend dated a Portuguese guy living in France who’s 65 years old and can’t retire because he never wanted to work enough to earn a normal pension. It was a rude awakening when he was planning to use his pension to travel the world lol. Lazy POS who flied off the handle regularly for no reason.

 Reply
Sara
 1 year ago
I have been here many time in periods of 3-4 months discovering the nature beach etc.At first I brushed of the horrible encounter with the Portuguese..when I spoke English they got angry when I tried Portuguese they mocked me… going to buy a innocent ice cream it says 1.80. She says 2.3 …putting on a show like it was a mistake, taking the ferry to the beach oh..sorry I don’t have change…taking tourist tax when it is off season…going to restaurant they give you tourist menu .. going to BD shop there is now price on items you have to ask them and they make up the price a they go.. checking in a hostel or hotel all pictures are lie, wifi don’t work, going to do laundry the machine does not give change back which is written in small text…why make such a machine???etc..EVERY INTERACTION IS A HUGE SCAM! It is extremely exhausting… Unfortunately YouTube and Instagram are hyping this shit hole up for now reason.. I am so done with the disgusting Portuguese people…feel bad for anyone stuck in this hell hole…

 Reply
Tony
 1 year ago
I am Portuguese and lived almost 50 years abroad, YES it’s a very correct description of this sad inbred country, where corruption and nepotism rules, and stupidity and IGNORANCE seems to be the highest achievement possible. Give a Portuguese a slitter of power, and he will immediately turn into a ruthless miniature Mussolini, this was very obvious in Holland where Portuguese, would be like parasites leaching on other Portuguese, stealing and defrauding each other in every way possible, work, house rent, selling cars etc. Envious shit little insignificant people, retarded and dumb. But the best “slaves” for common work in Northern Europe.
No wonder they “discovered Brazil”, because they turned the wrong way!)
And special the flag is SPOT ON.
in 1602, the Dutch apprehended the Galeão Santiago, after taking the ship, they wrote this:
“Say, Portuguese people, what nation will there be in the world so barbaric and
Greedy to commit to passing the Cape of Good Hope in the way
you all pass by, stuck in the depths of the sea with cargo, putting your
lives so likely to be lost, just because of greed; and therefore not
wonder that you lost so many ships and so many lives (…)”

 Reply
Jenny
 1 year ago
My friends have been defrauded of over 350,000E. 17 years of lawyers and the justice system have just got them deeper in debt with unspecified fines and “court fees” plus an “honest” lawyer who only took cash payments under the table in a local café.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Jenny
 1 year ago
How I understand you, I am very sorry for your hell.

 Reply
Pedro
 1 year ago
As a portuguese I’m sad to say the only way with this country is to leave it. We can’t change a culture and those of us who try regretted it. It’s a vicious circle. My sister worked at the.most respectable bank in the country which later was bankrupt by its corrupt but respected CEO.
She worked hard but guess who got promoted. The ones who pander to the boss and do all the illegal things he asks them to do

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Pedro
 1 year ago
Hi,
Unfortunately, that’s the sad truth. In Portugal, evil, mediocrity and incompetence always take precedence over morality and merit.
I wish you the best of luck and that you manage to get out, because Portugal has been doomed for a long time.

 Reply
Foreigner
 1 year ago
Stop hating foreigners for pointing out bad behavior.
Take responsibility for the state of your nation.
👇

Portugal map
 Reply
Nick
 1 year ago
Portugal, A sewer full of cockroaches

 Reply
Kevin
 1 year ago
Thank you for pointing out all these instances in Portugal. Whilst I was there in 2011, my rental car windscreen was smashed. I called the police who just seemed really lazy and unconcerned. I ended up having to take a taxi to the police station and the man that I saw could speak good English, but his sluggish lazy manner was enough to make me wonder if I was wasting my precious vacation time. To cut a long story short, I will not return to Carvoeiro, in that Godawful country which smells like an open sewer system. To hell with Portugal!

 Reply
Julie
 1 year ago
I thought it was just me ….
We bought into the fake PR and social media version of how wonderful it is to live in Portugal. (Great place for a vacay but NOT to live!)
Once the cracks appeared in the thickly laid varnish, we got a good dose of reality. Originally we wanted to wait out the 5 years to apply for EU citizenship but found out the more realistic number is more like 8 years until you get it (or may not get it). By year 2 we were done and over with living in Lisbon and made a plan to move to France. At this point we are counting the days to get out of this dump, we feel like we live in Bedrock City…. waiting for Fred Flintstone to appear at any moment.

I agree with most of what you have said although we did not ever have any occurrences where we were ripped off and did encounter some nice Portuguese people but you are always the outsider and yes, you feel the envy as an American.

Ultimately, we could no longer tolerate the absolute ineptness of how businesses are run, the annoying, depressing victim mentality of the people, less than mediocre food, filthy streets, shit graffiti everywhere and zero lack of initiative or pride in ownership. I started a business here in the tourism sector but there is not a day goes by where I want to bang my head against the wall trying to get anything done with the Portuguese and we are lucky as our 2 main vendors want to do better for themselves but the effort still is average and laborious on our end. If this does not improve in 2024 (not holding my breath) I will walk away from the business and not feel one bit bad about it. My energy is better spent with people who can get things done and where a difference can be made and appreciated.

It is a fact that 50% of Americans that move to Portugal leave. I suspect another good portion are stuck here with no exit plan.

Thank you for sharing this and allowing me to get this off my chest.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Julie
 1 year ago
Thank you very much for your comment.
Time is life and living, and that is why it is the most important thing we all have, so staying in Portugal for anything other than a vacation is literally obliterating our lives. The world’s development is accelerating exponentially, but Portugal is permanently stuck in the Stone Age.
I have learned that the overwhelming majority of the time dealing with the Portuguese people ends up being a waste of time as well highly toxic for you, if you’re lucky it is just that, because it can often be catastrophic, as was the case with me, because of the intrinsic dishonesty of this people and society as a whole, where in fact there is no net and no country to support and protect you when you most need.

As if that weren’t enough, and even worse and scarier than this is that Portugal is in practical terms a dictatorship. The Watergate scandal was like stealing a lollipop next to all the scandals that happen with frightening regularity in Portugal, but to which the Portuguese are all sickeningly indifferent (because they are almost all the same). It is all so grave, but so grave, that if only 10 percent of what happens in Portugal happened in the United States or in an EU country, it would trigger nothing less than a civil war.

Of course, life is always a big challenge anywhere and there are no perfect countries, but Portugal is diabolical and absolutely castrating to the lives of honest people who are chasing their dreams. I wish you the best of luck in your life outside Portugal, because Portugal can’t be fixed, because the Portuguese can’t be fixed.

 Reply
George
 1 year ago
So much crookedness among Portuguese businesses, including Chinese stores. Chinese ask you to pay more than you saw on the price tags after removing the price tags so you don’t have proof of cost. Honest businesses are few in between.

 Reply
Jens
 1 year ago
I lived in Portugal for less then one year. It wass my most horrible time ever in life. I have been scammed, threathened and assaulted. No one helps you. The Portugues are very closed and despressive people, very difficult to approach. When you live there for a while you have to be carefull not to become paranoide since no one you can trust in that country. I was an absolute nightmere. This country is very corrupt, in every field. Why is this country still a member of the EU?

 Reply
Danny
 1 year ago
If someone has not lived in Portugal, may think that these writings are exaggerated. But it is exactly the same as reality. A real hell with very jealous, evil and deceitful people who will stab you in the back at the first opportunity. Life in Portugal is like a nightmare. When you leave your home, you take this negative energy from those around you.

 Reply
Charlie
 1 year ago
There are good and bad people everywhere in the world, but here in Portugal, only absolute bad, very very bad. I am a social person, I always like to make new friends, but unfortunately it is almost impossible in this country, I always think that only one woman gave birth to all Portuguese people, because unfortunately they are all (unreliable and backstabber)

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Thank you, I found this at the right time. For so long I have been struggling thinking I was the only one to think this way and feeling guilty about it. I lost my health, my life savings and my self-esteem in this Dark Age’s place. If I wanted to work with retards, I would have become a psychiatrist. Now I feel ready to go, nowhere it can be as bad as here.

 Reply
Pedro Areias
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
As a Portuguese, I apologize for what happened. There are good, serious and hard working people and it’s sad that this occurs in the twentieth-first century.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
I know perfectly well what you feel, because I felt that way too, but the problem is obviously not us, but the Portuguese society, which looks more like a madhouse full of evil people, thieves and imbeciles. I also lost almost all my money and almost ended up living under a bridge, following a swindler stealing 85,000 euros from me, and who had already stolen at least more than five million euros over the years from other unsuspecting victims, and as I discovered later, with the support and total protection from the Portuguese courts and society, and this criminal NEVER even went to trial, protected by CORRUPT Portuguese judges. Obviously, five million euros can fill a lot of pockets! And when the Portuguese justice system is not corrupt, it is incredibly malicious, stupid and incompetent.

Portugal can take all our money, because unfortunately it CAN, being a sovereign “country” (just read the news on this site about the corrupt free ride). The victims in Portugal would only have justice if this hole of evil was “hypothetically but duly” invaded by external forces of good. Unfortunately, this can never happen because they are a “sovereign of criminals”, what a convenient situation for a country where most of the population are corrupt, crooks and thieves by opportunity! In practical terms, Portugal is as “democratic” as China. Now, never let that damn country take away your health! Because you, me, and all the honest people, including the (very few) decent Portuguese, are guaranteed to be worth much more than all the scoundrels in Portugal combined!

Like you say, any place is better than staying in Portugal. I only felt like a free man and completely myself again when I finally left Portugal. Please, never forget that you are worth much more than the scum that lives there. I am sincerely rooting very strongly for you.

 Reply
Sam
 2 years ago
We have been living in this country for almost 4 years and because of our work situation, we deal with these creatures a lot.

 Reply
Sara
 Reply to  Sam
 1 year ago
I’m only visiting and feel trauma from interaction with Portuguese people..I feel bad for you…

 Reply
Anonymous
 2 years ago
I agree with the comment below. From my personal experience the vast majority of people you will encounter as a foreigner are extremely unpleasant and untrustworthy.

It is not worth building relationships with them, they are primarily motivated by resentment and jealousy.

I am sure there are nice Portuguese, but they are hard if not impossible to find as a foreigner.

 Reply
Anonymous
 2 years ago
At first glance, some people may feel that this article is racist/discriminatory. I am sad to say that the points outlined within have generally been my experience growing up with a number of Portuguese-Canadians in Canada. Some of the worst people from my childhood came from Portugal unfortunately.

Reading this article was frankly cathartic for me, as I have had resentment towards these people for a long time.

 Reply
Eileen Vicentr
 Reply to  Anonymous
 2 years ago
I have lived in Portugal for over 20 horrible years. It has been hell! The article is sadly 100 percent true. I married a Pprruguese man. He has been horrible to me fir 40 years. I am trapped! I am trying really hard to leve this hell. It has taken way too long!

 Reply
Anonymous
 2 years ago
I had a good one today.

I hired a lawyer more than 2 months ago in Almancil to find out about a criminal complaint I made months ago. He found the case had been dropped by the Public Prosecutor – partly because I had not responded to correspondence from them. I have been living at secret addresses for the last 6 months due to a very violent neighbour who is believed to be involved with organised crime. His crimes towards me included land theft, blackmail and extortion to keep the stolen land, driving me off the road etc etc – and then blocking my post box to prevent me receiving post.

So we were reopening the case as the neighbour’s intimidation continues – I’m a woman. Even major journalists know this guy and helped rescue one of his female partners towards whom he was very violent.

The lawyer writes today and says the deadline is in 3 working days, but he only wants to complain about the neighbour taking pictures in my property. Nothing else. And, of course he knows it is impossible to get a new lawyer by the dealine. We are highly suspicious – everyone in Almancil knows everyone else. So, we are submitting a new complaint ourselves – gender based violence etc.

I am now at the stage where I don’t believe one word out of the mouth of a Portuguese person. I have found virtually everyone of them to be dishonest, corrupt and liars. Poortugal Scum indeed. One only needs to read about Merde im Boca to understand these people.

 Reply
Pedro Areias
 2 years ago
First, let me state that there are exaggerations and misconceptions. There are serious and hard working Portuguese but they’re difficult to encounter. Due to the toxic environment, they are usually at work or at home.

In many points, you’re right. However, it’s complex. Our history is outstandingly long and complex.

Some of what you see comes from Soviet Russia. We had a Fascist Dictatorship from 1926 (well, a military coup in may 28) up to 1974. It was horrible. Then in 1974 we had a military coup that was taken advantage by the Soviets to install a communist state. It “failed” and we moved to democracy. I wrote “failed” since what happened was that Soviet ideas were disseminated at all levels and the public administration and work unions became under communist control. Many parts of the public administration, work ethics, and people’s behavior are still contaminated by the Soviet poison. Even within families, the struggle is unbearable, and often all tricks are allowed. I’ve seen and experienced everything.

From my part, I can’t complain about the hospitals (both public and private) and other services.

 Reply
Diana
 2 years ago
I still feel the implications of my stay in Portugal. The author of this blog is so right about his views on the Portuguese people. At all levels you ‘ll meet them, from the people in the street, the waiters, the brokers, lawyers and the judiciary. I never had a worse experience in any country I have visited or lived then in Portugal. Keep this blog alive and warn the world for this country.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Diana
 2 years ago
Thank you Diana,

I will certainly continue to develop this blog and inform about Portugal the best way I can, and your opinions, testimonies and experiences about that country are essential. On this blog everyone has their voice and opinion, contrary to what happens in Portugal’s fake democracy.

 Reply
Aggie
 2 years ago
Your website contains really interesting insights, and obviously I found it because it resonates with my experience. It’s my fourth visit to Portugal, this time to Porto. I was born and raised in two former Soviet block countries, so I know a thing or two about socialism, poverty, rudeness, lack of empathy, and catching up with the West. I also lived and studied on other continents. I’m not going to complain about crowds, tourists, high prices, urine-smelling streets, or lack of infrastructure because these are the things you will always encounter (to a varied degree) in popular tourist destinations. However, the one thing that strikes me each time I’m here is how unbelievably rude the Portuguese people are. I truly understand that the locals are fed up with stupid tourists because even if they make money off of them, tourists do make life difficult. I get that. But Portuguese meanness has a different quality to it – these people take ACTIVE pleasure in humiliating you (for absolutely no reason), and judging by their behavior in shops, on the streets, or on public transport, they have zero empathy and couldn’t care less if you dropped dead right at their feet. We have three more days left in Porto, and my husband nearly broke out in tears today after he heard some Spaniards on the metro – he said he wanted to hug them and ask them to take him back to civilization :)))

 Reply
Swedish
 Reply to  Aggie
 1 year ago
The sad thing is about living here even as a Swedish person is that I lack the honesty and care to do a good job.

The best service you get is generally from foreign people and I once complained about a car mechanic that charged for making a diagnosis of my car problems and didn’t find the problem, but still wanted to charge me 150 euros when there was an obvious problem with the car. I got angry and said I would not pay for charges that was not agreed upon, so I got my keys back and they said that I should not count on their services anymore. I didn’t even reply to this as I am sick and tired of arguing with ignorant Portuguese people and this type of behaviour is more a rule than an exception. Most times I can’t stand them and I don’t even try to befriend them.

The aggressiveness, the rudeness, corruption and arrogance is enough for me to really not want to engage at all if possible. I don’t admire their culture, small-mindedness, their pathetic patriotism and development. I understand why they are poor. They don’t even treat each other any better.

I find their sense of humour to be very mean and I am not convinced that they are just joking as they claim. Their TV is terrible and food bland.

The fact that Portugal is a really beautiful place to be does not change the fact that us foreigners normally don’t like the Portuguese people. Most people come here to get the right to stay in Europe and then move on. Portugal has a decreasing population in spite of their growing costs of living, and no employers will pay a livable wage, but expect 100% commitment and overtime.

I am planning on moving to Spain, but have not been able yet. This country doesn’t feel like my future. There is no opportunities and progression in life here.

 Reply
Sara
 Reply to  Swedish
 1 year ago
Hi!

Have been here many times on vacation to avoid snowy Sweden… But this is my last one… Among the beaches and palm trees hide disgusting Portuguese individuals who lurk or mock you.

Slowly the curtain has been pulled away from my naive eyes… 8 out of 10 interactions are completely psychologically taxing… Feel sorry for the people who live here… Occasional encounters with wandering tourists that have given me a bit of happiness for the moment…

— Original text in Swedish: —

Hej!

Har varit här många gånger på semester för att undvika snöiga Sverige…men det här är min sista…bland stränder och palmträd gömmer sig avskyvärda portugisiska individer som lurar eller hånar dig .

Sakta har skynket dragits undan för mina naiva ögon..8 av 10 interaktioner är fullständigt psykiskat påfrestande.. tycker synd om de som bor här…enstaka möten med vandrande turister som gett mig en gnutta lycka för stunden..

 Reply
Thomas
 Reply to  Aggie
 2 years ago
I live in the Azores (not on the main island) and people are not as bad as described here, (dentists are really bad though), perhaps because it is a mixture of Portuguese, with the French, the Dutch, American and Canadians, some Germans and at least some people are friendly, honest and caring here in the Azores (Pico island). But yes there are some cases of crookery, theft etc. as described but not as bad as I would guess on the continent.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Aggie
 2 years ago
Hi Aggie,

Unfortunately, rudeness, egotism and lack of empathy are very common traits among the Portuguese. This innate lack of civility undoubtedly also contributes decisively to the great backwardness and dysfunctionality of the country in all respects. Of course, there are always genuinely nice people, despite the fact that sympathy can often just be superficial and self-serving.
How well I understand your husband 🙂

 Reply
Manso
 2 years ago
I have barely finished reading the first post I came across on your website. I literally stopped midway so that I can write this note to you.

I am the son of a Portuguese woman born in Mozambique. The entire family was displaced by Frelimo violence and came to South Africa as refugees. My grandparents themselves were economic migrants out of the area of Serra da Estrela. My grandfather’s father also made his living in Mozambique, having been sent there by the Salazar government to develop the agriculture.

My personal journey of discovering my roots, the history of my Portuguese side of the family (my father is Afrikaans) and meeting family members I had never met in my life before, was depressing. The words you write resonate deeply with me. I thought I was being a typical german and that my experience of Poortugal surely had to be an exception. I started questioning my sanity and my beliefs.

I am very relieved to find my experience validated in your writing. I would like to share two instances of the absurdity I experienced;

I had a court case in 2021 against an employee of the library, who called the cops on me when I asked her to keep her voice down in the library (in VFX). What started as an entry in the livro de reclamações literally ended up in a court case in the favour of the obnoxious bitch at the library.

My family’s house on the tejo at Vila Franca de Xira (VFX) was hijacked by a squatters 47 years ago. Now their drug-dealer son lives there too, along with his two children. Wonderful, don’t you think. There’s a housing crisis and I’m not allowed to live in my own house unless I… first, find alternative accommodation for these pigs within a 2-km radius, second, pay 6 months of their lease upfront, and third, pay for their relocation.

I’m starting to understand why there are so many arson fires in Portugal. It is a MUCH worse place than the shit-hole colonies like South Africa or Mozambique.

I have yet to resolve any of the issues I’ve mentioned. Things simply don’t move in the legal or justice system. I am a dual-citizen of two of the worst-off and corrupt places ON EARTH. Still trying to come to terms with it. What has not been difficult is my decision to move to the Netherlands.

Your blog is am amazing find for me at a very challenging time. Thank you for the effort you put into it. Most of all, thank you for your honesty!

 Reply
Amelia
 Reply to  Manso
 6 months ago
Gosh Mando! I was born in Holland but grew up in South Africa. At 36 I went back to my roots in Holland and my experience there was horrifying. Hate, jealousy and discrimination, made the 9 years I worked there a hell. One good thing was that at least in general people are more honest.
So 30 years ago I moved to Portugal (woman alone!) and I have finally reached the point at 75 that I finally have to move away from the wonderful mountains and nature plus animals that have kept me there so long, because it has turned into a full war with the people here.
When I was rich and successful everyone was my friend but after they robbed me blind, I am treated like they treat their dogs………harrassed, mobbed, lied about and threatened. They want me gone so they can steal my land and chop my trees down etc. My public cul de sac access road has rendered intransitable by a neighbour deviating the rainwater drainage pipes from the village above down it, plus escavating deep gulleys across with his JCB. I am a prisoner (having to call a taxi to take me shopping) and the junta and camara refuse to do anything, even after more than a year of official letters and Foia requests. They just don’t respond. The 3 complaints at the police were all dismissed before they reached the court. My Quinta too has been damaged by huge landslides and no engineer, architect or lawyer wants to come and look, avaliate and write a report on the damage.
Yeah, time to leave this “paradise” inhabited by “devils”.
I now understand why in South Africa the African blacks were considered a level above the uncultured Portuguese! Sorry to have to say that!!!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Amelia
 6 months ago
I’m so sorry to hear your horrible story, but that’s what happens when one comes to live in Poortugal, sooner or later, one way or another. Life ends and hell on earth begins. We stop living our precious lives and paying attention to what matters (family, career, leisure…) and our lives are reduced to just fighting dark creatures and crazy people every day. In other words, we don’t live! It’s like we’re dead to life, but with our eyes open! You don’t deserve this, and no good person deserves such suffering and disrespect. I wish you a lot of luck and happiness, but far away from Poortugal, if you can, because it’s the only solution to end the misery, flee Poortugal as soon as possible.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Manso
 2 years ago
Hi Manso,

Reading your comment made me very sad because of the terrible ordeals you are going through, but I understand very well what you are saying. It is outrageous! No one deserves to be treated like this, but we are talking about Portugal where these ultra absurd (and criminal against the victims) court decisions and huge injustices and violence against the good people and in favor of the bad people are the absolute norm. A country without justice at all like Portugal is not going anywhere, and hence it becomes and it is, of course, a dictatorship.

From what I can see, you are a great human being. Never give up of your dreams.

Many, many thanks for the encouraging words, they mean a lot to me. I wish you all the best in the Netherlands (great country) and my spirit is with you. In my view, leaving Portugal is the best and only option, because Portugal is such a miserable country on a human level as it is also a utter madhouse, therefore, it does not interest to honest and decent people.

 Reply
Manso
 2 years ago
I was surprised to find that one of the pictures featured in this post (of a bunch of miserable people waiting at a dilapidated bus stop) is in fact the stop closest to my family’s hijacked house in Rua Serpa Pinto in Vila Franca de Xira!!
In Vila Franca de Xira –the erstwhile pearl of the ribatejo, now the smelly armpit of the ribatejo– the term used to congratulate someone on a remarkable feat is “ladrãoooo!”. 😟

 Reply
Diana
 2 years ago
Apart from some nice people I met in Portugal, the majority I ‘ve met there were NOT nice people. I encountered , dishonesty, flat out lying, underhanded people and simply not friendly, not refined but rough and blunt. I wanted to buy a little house in the surrounding of Lisboa. I never had so much trouble with brokers, lawyers that I am happy the deal was blown off. I lost so much money and no one seemed to care. I had the felling that they even enjoyed it to let a foreigner pay for nothing. I will never return to that dark place.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Diana
 2 years ago
Hi Diana,

It is true, unfortunately it is very easy to be scammed with a facade of legality in Portugal, actually behind any business can be a scam, I really mean ANY business. It’s always happening everywhere. I even really liked certain aspects of Portugal, but the people are mostly very dishonest and incompetent, or simply don’t care about others, making it impossible and potential very dangerous to try to have a good life in Portugal. In the end, it is a very typical and destructive mentality of the Portuguese people themselves, however, surely there are (unfortunately very few) decent Portuguese who also end up being victims of the system or emigrate, because unfortunately they are a very tiny minority and are powerless do change things.

 Reply
J.M.
 2 years ago
I was searching for a guy with a chainsaw to mow a lot of small trees in my yard for several days or weeks and I have posted an ad offering a splendid €80 per day. There were comments posted by some guys wanting the job but not having a chainsaw or a truck for transportation and some were laughing off at the amount. One middle aged guy wrote to me that he’s got what it takes (chainsaw, oil, truck etc.) but he wants €100 per day. I replied that let’s try for one day and if it all goes well we’ll continue. Then he wrote back that he wanted €120. I said okay, but let’s make it one day and see how it goes. Then nothing and he wrote back later he doesn’t want to do it. He probably prefers to receive his state support €300 or so, so he doesn’t have to work.

 Reply
Horacio Mendez
 2 years ago
I’ve survived Portugal and I’ve enjoyed many things in Portugal, and some of the wonderful people Portugal has aside from all the greedy and egoistic people living next door to the wonderful people, but since this blog is about Downsides, let me mention something that bothers me till this day.

What bothers and even scares me are the bankers, both the cashiers and the branch managers, not only in Portugal, but also in the USA and in many other countries, but the IMPUNITY of the bankers in Portugal is staggering. And their trickstery is world class! The way a Portuguese bank branch manager is able to manipulate the ATM machines, swindle and defraud the branch’s customers is beyond shocking. And the way the bank cashiers manipulate cash withdrawal over the counter and cheat the older and unsuspecting customers, is disgraceful.

Just some of the crooked bank manager’s swindling techniques:

1. (The crooked branch manager) Sees the customer approaching the indoor ATM and runs behind it to jam the customer’s debit card inside of the ATM past the stage where the customer has already made an electronic withdrawal but did not withdraw his cash from the ATM yet. Since the branch is already closed (after 15:00 H) the branch manager apologizes but can’t open the door. So the customer suffers a loss of several hundred Euros.

2. While withdrawing a large amount of cash (say €2500) over the counter, the same crooked bank branch manager hands the customer €2000 in cash and says in Portuguese: “This is your €2500, Sir. Have a nice day! (Mr. Foreigner)”. Knowing that foreigners can’t speak much Portuguese and can’t fight back. When confronted, in Portuguese, the thief-in-house apologizes, and hands the remaining (€500) to the customer and begins his explanation tirade on why this has happened.

3. After the above trickstery happens more than once and the upset and concerned (for other people’s safety) bank Customer submits a serious and well written report to the HQ of the Bank in Lisbon, both via mail and email and even via a phone, after waiting for several months, repeating the report again, then waiting for several years, and realizing nothing was done and the same crooked bank branch manager is still working there and pulling his tricks on other people, the concerned customer understands the seriousness of the situation and leaves Portugal for good. (Or continues to live there, while being alert of the “surroundings”).

4. This extra story was uncalled for, but I remember dealing with a lawyer having office in a building without any sign of the law firm at the entrance, and then realizing the lawyer just took my money and did nothing, while further ignoring my inquiries. Just a desert snack on top of the crooked banker’s story. Happens just about anywhere, does it?

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Horacio Mendez
 2 years ago
Hi Horacio,

Thank you so much for your valuable testimony.
Very shamefully, this is day-to-day life in Portugal, impunity for all criminals is the rule, quite simply because the public entities that are supposed to enforce the law and protect society from criminals are also run by corrupts, crooks and useless people in general who don’t give a damn about others, much less victims.
Very regrettably, one thing is sure, when you live in Portugal you will be defrauded, and repeatedly, it could be €10, it could be €130K as was my case, it could be 100 million euros, it really does not matter the amount, it could be a very incompetent service, it only depends on how much money you have and are willing to spend or invest (in my view, no one should ever invest in Portugal, because you run a colossal risk of things going very, very wrong, and then there is no net for you, because really there is no country there).
And it is scary, that for this to happen, you don’t even need to to anything out of the ordinary, you just have to try to live a normal life in that miserable country, for a bomb to explode in your hands when you least expect it.

 Reply
Horacio Mendez
 Reply to  Blog Author
 2 years ago
I agree and I lost some stuff and money to thieves, crooks and scammers. There’s also another side of Portugal where some of the Portuguese workers would do some work and just leave. They never ask to be paid until I remind them how much do I owe them and I pay them every penny they have earned. This happens quite often, especially by those who have never been to the US or Canada and they seem to be unspoiled by greed. Those kind of guys need to be reminded that you owe them money and not the vice versa.

I have all kinds of stories from the years of my life in Portugal, both positive and negative ones.

 Reply
Hit that British fat hoe
 Reply to  Horacio Mendez
 10 months ago
Who else likes to fuck a BBW drunk British woman in Portugal. They fuckin love to look dirty.

You British don’t fuck them right, that’s why you’re being replaced my blacks and Indians lol 😆

 Reply
Horacio Mendez
 Reply to  Horacio Mendez
 2 years ago
What I was trying to say that the seemingly POSITIVE aspect of Portuguese life is proof of that many of the self-deprecating Portuguese swimming in a river of saudade sadness destroying their own well being by ignoring the need to have a decent income and have proper skills at something, simply do not care to earn a living or even to collect their own pay and especially are unapt at showing up to work on time or showing up at work at all. There’s even more: many of so called contractors, and workers get upset and even angry when a hirer (employer) offers them a well paid job and asks them to not be late with certain instructions and safety rules to be followed. That’s where a mistake is made because Portuguese workers hate rules and hate to show up on time or show up at all. Never force a Portugeuse to go to work at your schedule. They will show up whenever they want and they will leave whenever they want and if you protest that they left one hour late they will never show up to work for you again. I suppose they have choices where they can find work or simply spend time at home with their family. And the work that is done is usually of poor quality or mediocre at best. Perhaps that is the result of the Portuuese government telling their own citizens and best specialists to go to other Third World countries such as Angola, Brazil or Moçambique, where they pay better salaries than in Portugal. That’s an enviable trait, to be so relaxed and free from the need to keep a stable employment, but this is also the reason why Portugal is so poor by Western European standards and is now behind economically and developmentally not only to ALL of the Central, Northern and Western European countries, but also to some of the Eastern European countries as well. Perhaps the socialist government’s policy of paying everyone a measly ~€400 per month for NOT WORKING works well enough for the Portugalese who do not want to work?

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Horacio Mendez
 2 years ago
I myself had many bad experiences like this with people I hired to do some work at my house in Portugal and the overwhelming majority of the time the work was done very incompetently or at best mediocrely, for example, I got a ramp that is tilted slightly to the side and I tried to hire up to six gardeners until finally, unfortunately, I had to give up, because everyone bring their problems, from not showing up, to cutting the palm leaves in half, or because the work was too careless, so I had to make the decision to tend and mow my lawn from then on, which I even like, the problem is that it takes up my time.
That’s true, for many lazy Portuguese, €400 is more than enough incentive to stay at home to do nothing.
Though, I must say that I also had good experiences with competent professionals, but unfortunately only very occasionally.

 Reply
G. T.
 2 years ago
Hi!! I understand you because I also had a lot of problems there. I was robbed 2 times in “the peaceful country” and when I tryed to talk with the caps they just didn’t anything and as I’m Brazilian, I suffered a lot of racism, all the time, and not just at work. The wage is horrible, cost of life, impossible. They are good saying that is a paradise country but the weather is not the best in the world, a lot of wind, cold beaches also in the summer, food is ok but basic, boring malls, boring enviroment, small market, people are rude and closed. I can’t understand how a lot of people “fall in love with”.Portugal for me is a illusion. I just wanna leave soon as possible.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  G. T.
 2 years ago
Hi,

Thank you for your testimony. What you describe here is the rule, most Portuguese have this “mentality” of not giving a damn about their fellow people, which includes the authorities of course, that’s why living in Portugal is so dangerous. There are no moral ground in Portugal, you are totally alone.

 Reply