Portugal robbed me €130.000 euros and six years of my life!
Blog AuthorBlog Author17 November, 2022Moving and Living in Portugal, Corruption in Portugal, Portuguese (in)Justice190 Comments
Living in Portugal as an expat
Portugal is a beautiful country full of untapped potential, but unfortunately the majority of Portuguese will never let that happen.

What this country full of crooks and obnoxious people has done to me, and to countless other victims every day, is so shocking that it could only happen in any dictatorship in a third world country. Yet it happened in a supposed EU “democracy”! How is this possible?

My life in Portugal was an endless agonizing nightmare of the most dreadful things that can happen to a person’s life. The Portuguese are generally terrible people, very dishonest and stupid. At first glance Portugal has the façade of a more or less developed country, paid for by the taxpayers of the European Union, but underneath it functions like a third world country, but much worse than that, because in practical terms, Portugal is a dictatorship, since there is no real separation of institutional powers. The judicial power in Portugal is a complete fraud in broad daylight, utterly corrupt, abhorrently incompetent and very cozy with the corrupt political power. Unfortunately, having joined the European Union, it deceives people into thinking it is a more or less developed country, nothing could be further from the truth, as you can read in this article and all the others on this blog that portray the true cancerous nature of this fake democracy, based on my experience living in Portugal as an expat/immigrant for nine years.

Summing up.
I am an EU citizen who moved to Portugal in my thirties with the idea that associated with good weather, quiet life, good food and other advantages, (I thought at the time, because without a doubt there are very good things in Portugal, but only regionally, because the people are unfortunately absolutely horrible, once you get to know this society better), and Portugal being part of the EU and the Euro currency would be a good place to start a business targeting the EU market. Unfortunately, I was so dead wrong and I just wasted nine years of my life, especially the last six years that I was blatantly cheated by the crooks within the Portuguese fraudulent justice system and the swarm of parasite lawyers around it, salivating for more helpless victims to take all their money and their last drop of blood. The following is my nightmare story:

I am very, very lucky to be out of that hellhole and to be able to try to be happy again, as all human beings deserve to be. Now, after those nine terrible years in that horrible country, I can look back and reflect and come to some deeply disturbing conclusions about the character of the Portuguese, so my ordeal will at least serve to warn and prevent many other people from wasting their lives, money and precious time in that society teeming with crooks and people who don’t care about anything or anyone except for themselves, but also to warn the EU and the Europeans about the systemic theft that Portugal is doing with the EU money, our money. Sending our money to this undemocratic country owned by crooks is deeply immoral and criminal for the European taxpayers.

Now I see clearly, practically from the first day I set foot in Portugal, that I had nothing but problems, and I remember that I was almost always stressed out fighting the big and small annoyances that were thrown at me every day.
Portugal is a very irritating place to live for so many different reasons.
Unfortunately, I realized too late that Portugal is a total madhouse. Almost nothing makes sense there.

Quite frankly, I’m sure that the Portuguese in general suffer from various chronic mental illnesses, because that’s the only way to explain all the absolute insanity and boundless stupidity of that pseudo-sh*tty-country.

The services and the bureaucracy of the Portuguese State can function more or less normally if you are lucky, but can also often turn into a nightmare to deal with, the more serious the matter, it tends to get worse, they are full of contradictory and obstructive regulations that seem to have been written by sadists, as I have also often been served by very unhelpful, lazy and obstructive civil servants, others were indeed very friendly, but in the end also not very helpful in the sense of getting things done quickly (or simply done), probably not their fault, but because of the broken public system and other peers.
Most of the time the civil servants you talk to will tell you something (very) different and contradictory to the other civil servant you “just” talked to before, it’s like every public office and civil servants having their own set of rules separate from the others, and they love to say no. Information can also differ whether you get it on the website, over the phone or in person, total madness and arbitrariness, depending first of all on the official you talk to and the place where you go (with the same services) to solve your problems. Then they make you jump from one government office to another for days or even months and it could be years, it can even take more than a decade (often in circles). It makes you very frustrated and you lose a lot of precious time, although I must say that for most Portuguese this high level of inefficiency and redundancy, which has a very negative impact and compounding effect on people’s lives and businesses (and in the Portuguese economy as a result), is considered quite “normal” and they can’t see anything wrong with it. The Portuguese just shrug and say that’s the way it is.
These hardships occur not so much for individuals with trivial matters, but for those who want to do more important things.

An episode that really shows what it is like to deal with the Portuguese public administration happened when I went to register the name of my company, I registered it with one of the names I chose, but when I went back the next day (or even the same day, I don’t remember) another civil servant who was there had the audacity to tell me, I didn’t even ask her anything, that if it was up to her, she wouldn’t let me register that name for the company (she took pleasure in telling me that). Yes, this is the kind of shitty people and total arbitrariness you have to deal with and depend on every day in Portugal. Very dangerous for your life and your projects and this episode perfectly represents Poortugal on all levels.

Portugal is a country full of people who are dying to f*** up your life.

The Portuguese tax system is a perfect killing machine for companies and entrepreneurs, especially when they are in their infancy and more fragile. How stupid can it be? It hurts the development of the economy tremendously, and in the end it only makes the economy and people’s lives poorer and poorer. Portugal resembles a Soviet planned economy much more than a free market economy. Enterprises (as a concept) are seen as the enemy and the source of all evil (some can indeed be, due to the human factor, but that’s not the question), no wonder there are so many communists in Portugal, even if someone says he/she isn’t, but then you just have to talk to them about serious matters to see that the majority of Portuguese actually share the ideas of communism, regardless of the political party they vote for.

Portugal is not an entrepreneur-friendly country, to put it extremely nicely, quite the opposite. The Portuguese are much more adept at getting what they call a “tacho”, a pot, for life, i.e. a job that pays well for doing nothing, than they are at getting down to work and creating a legitimate and innovative business from scratch, that adds value to society and the economy.

And when someone in Portugal achieves legitimate success on their own merits, in whatever business (or profession), they are most of the time looked upon with great envy by the Portuguese in general. Even a simple café or restaurant can be the target of the envy of the neighbors, who, if they think the owner is “earning” too much, they may even call in the the public health inspectors to make his life hell and close down the café or restaurant, inventing slander against him and boycotting the use of that café or restaurant, until he goes bankrupt due to lack of customers.

In Portugal you suffer for not being successful, but you also suffer and are punished if you are successful, in order to end your success, because the Portuguese don’t like honest and talented people.

However, precisely the opposite happens, when the Portuguese meet or know a crook who has become rich by swindling and robbing countless victims, the Portuguese will generally look upon him or her with great admiration, much flattery, and see them as very clever and sophisticated people. This really sick and aberrant behavior can be explained very well, because in fact the overwhelming majority of the Portuguese are also crooks and people without any integrity. That is why the Portuguese always vote for the same criminals they admire so much and identify with, and that is why Portuguese politics is so endemically filthy, turning the Portuguese pseudo-democracy into a true covert dictatorship controlled by criminals.

Democracy only works and is real with good people, it doesn’t work when almost the entire population is no good and doesn’t give a damn.

In Portugal the State is very weak with the strong, but very strong with the weak.

I will try to simplify the following explanation of the nightmare that happened to me in Portugal, without being too specific and extensive, whenever possible.
I was blatantly robbed of €130,000 by the whole rotten Portuguese society, and my family and I were psychologically tortured, manipulated, lied to and deceived by the very crooked and crazy Portuguese people during six years of excruciating psychological torture, because I didn’t know what I was dealing with at the time, and couldn’t possibly know until it was too late. This Portuguese nightmare has of course taken a very heavy toll on my productivity and consequently on the company’s sales and profits, causing me to lose many business opportunities, but for the Portuguese there is no such thing as psychological, emotional, personal or business damage. This “country”, most of its state institutions, companies and professionals, especially those that should exist to protect you, are filled to the brim with crooks, thieves and demented people of the worst kind you can find in the world.

Clothes hanging from the windows of buildings in Portugal
The clothes of the Portuguese: This is a Portuguese tradition practiced all over the country, which consists of showing all your clothes (without exception) to your neighbors and anyone who passes by on the street, so that everyone gets to know everyone else’s underwear. It’s probably a very progressive way to bring the community together. (sarc.) | The Real Portugal
I and many other people (all Portuguese, at least from what I have been able to find out and from the frauds that have actually been recorded by the “authorities”) were swindled out of more than five million euros (it was probably much more, but the corrupt Portuguese courts do not disclose any information to help the victims, on the contrary, they conceal all possible information they possible can from the victims, deliberately to protect the criminals and themselves) by a crooked “entrepreneur” who only many years later, I and countless other victims were lucky enough to learn that this crook stole millions during at least the first three years. Before he also stole €85,000 from me, and during those three years, before the Portuguese courts piled up dozens and dozens of cases from the victims of the thieves, the Portuguese judges, acting in the most outrageous and criminal way possible, dismissed all the cases as just normal debts, since the thief just had to tell the judge that he will pay (shockingly, during those three years he didn’t even have an organized accounting, disclosing company payments, receivables and bank transactions, including not paying his tax obligations.
Of course, this was very convenient for someone who is stealing (siphoning off) money from his own company, more precisely from his paying customers, since his company did not even have an accountant, because he shamelessly said he could not afford one (this was later discovered in the bankruptcy report, which, not surprisingly, was also shelved and criminally concealed by another Portuguese crooked judge), but he could still keep getting thousands and thousands of euros, accumulating millions, from all his customers. Obviously, he never returned a cent to anyone during these three years of continuous theft, so the thief could keep his fraudulent business open to steal and keep all the money he wanted from his unsuspecting customers, this time with the full support and seal of approval of the criminal Portuguese judges and courts fully behind him in case the swindler needed a little more “legal” help. This is the real Portugal and how everything works there!

Even after his company was declared bankrupt, he continued to do business openly, receiving and stealing money from new customers, including me! I repeat, his company was already officially declared bankrupt/insolvent and even then he continued to steal customers! (What kind of sh*thole country is this?!)

Just to clarify the two figures mentioned, the €85,000 refers to the thief from the fraudulent company, the €130,000 refers approximately to the value of the theft plus all my legal and other expenses over all these years. I spent a total of nine years in Portugal and this catastrophic theft and legal nightmare has literally sucked six years out of my family life.

My company needed a special machine. This machine was represented and distributed in Portugal by this crook via his company. This crook has been on the market for many years, and at first (at least as far as I know) there were no problems for the customers, but at a certain point this crook started taking money from his customers and making it his own money (carrying out a continuous embezzlement), and as the growing pile of cases in the corrupt Portuguese courts was literally just gathering dust, he became even bolder when he realized that there were absolutely no criminal or legal consequences for him; So the thief happily continued his robberies of innocent victims for more than three years, while the courts knew about it all along and, outrageously, did absolutely nothing to stop it!

I did very thorough due diligence on this company, but surprisingly and quite strangely, there was absolutely NO, NADA information about any wrongdoing by the thief’s company, QUITE THE OPPOSITE, there were even some very reputable Portuguese business press media articles praising the company and it’s owner (the swindler) and it’s CEO (his brother), including (gasp!) some GOVERNMENT AWARDS granted to the thief’s company.

However, this is completely irrelevant, since the onus is obviously not on my diligence, but on what the justice system has done, or rather not done, over all these years in relation to this serial criminal, operating with total impunity and under the protection of the Portuguese courts themselves.

In Portugal there is never a way to know the truth, you have no reliable sources whatsoever, almost everything bad and very bad is deliberately hidden or masked from the public.
Needless to say, it is an understatement to say that Portugal is an extremely dangerous environment in which to do business! Let alone simply live.

When I bought the machine it was agreed that I would receive it within 30 days, but the deadline has passed and the thief and the accomplice of the CEO of the company continue to make false promises and lies to me, of course I realized that I was being swindled by these crooks and then I immediately looked for a lawyer, I didn’t want to take any chances so I chose one of the best and most reputable law firms in Lisbon and by the way very expensive one, so I thought I would be in good hands.

I didn’t know it yet, but I was about to begin a long journey of enormous suffering (the agony comes from trying so hard to make sense of things, but nothing makes sense in Portugal, it’s a total madhouse, basically you never know anything and are constantly being misled by all the crooks and idiots participating in this farce, it’s like living inside the drum of a washing machine), as well as being robbed over and over again, but this time by the crooked Portuguese lawyers and corrupt courts. In order to convince me and get all my money, these Portuguese lawyers told me that I had been seriously misled by the owner of the company and its CEO (which I already knew), and that if he didn’t return my money, they assured me that the thieves would face long prison sentences in the light of the law. However, none of this happened, on the contrary, in the end, after many legal appeals, he was always acquitted by the corrupt Portuguese judges, and later the case was simply dismissed, but not before I had paid so much money to these law firms and to the extortionist Portuguese courts with their ridiculous short appeal deadlines, which are made on purpose so that the court and my lawyers can demand even more exorbitant “urgent” fees and taxes, because the courts know that it’s impossible to meet these artificial deadlines in time, so the conniving lawyers can demand even more money from the victims because it’s urgent (and the victims have no alternative if they want justice than to pay every amount to them, but in the end I realized that I was just being swindled by the fraudulent Portuguese justice system, which is only there to protect the criminals and scorn the victims).

It is quite obvious that the Portuguese courts do everything they can to hinder the progress of cases.

My wife and I have endured more than four years of this terrible nightmare and two law firms, with the fraud of the Portuguese justice system and its parasitic lawyers constantly making us believe that justice will be done sooner or later, with the intention of only extorting more money from us. Our lawyers telling us we should appeal (again) because it was just bad luck but we have a case and VERY SOLID EVIDENCE don’t worry the lawyer said you will get your money back or at least I can assure you the thieves will go to prison if they don’t return your money, except in the end when their pockets are already full and mine are empty they start to change their tune saying some gems of knowledge like; Justice is luck (I thought it was a matter of law) and the judge can decide whatever he/she wants, even if it contradicts the letter of the law, because the judge’s word is paramount (regardless of the letter of the law, this is, shockingly, the definition of a dictatorship and the TOTAL opposite of the rule of law). I found it very baffling that the CEO of the company (not the owner of the company) was never indicted even though he continuously blatantly lied not only to me but also to all the other victims who were tricked into the fraudulent deals and the judges knew this, but for the dishonest and idiotic Portuguese judges it seems that a CEO is some kind of cleaning lady with no responsibility whatsoever in the management of the company.

Portuguese car stand with cars for sale
This car would probably barely be road legal in any EU country, but in Portugal you have to pay good money for the “privilege” of owning one. (Especially suburbs of big cities and most of the rest of the country) | The Real Portugal
Later, more than five years after I was robbed, I found out, no matter how, that he (the owner of the company) was living in a very luxurious modern house in a very high-cost area with at least two luxury cars that I could recognize, and that he had also created a new company full of materials and industrial machinery to manufacture goods. (with my money and all the money he stole from all the other victims!)
All this time he had all this money and assets with him, but he always presented himself as insolvent (and divorced, so typical). The thief closed his company a little later after I filed the lawsuit, even though the company had already been officially declared bankrupt when he stole my money and the other victims after me. He hid all five million (but it was probably much more) that he stole from countless victims, and when he thought he had gotten away with it, with absolutely no consequences, he started openly spending my money and the money of all the other victims he stole, with total impunity!

In Portugal, IT IS LEGAL TO STEAL, but it is illegal to say that someone stole from you (as they are always acquitted), therefore the judge will accuse you of defaming the honor of that person (the thief), and then you will be sued by the thief who stole from you, and you will have to pay him (the thief), on top of the money he has already stolen from you.
This is how the filthy criminal and dictatorial Portuguese “justice system” shamelessly protects criminals. Poortugal is a total nuthouse!

Portuguese “justice” is so arbitrary and fraudulent that if you consult ten Portuguese lawyers, they will most likely tell you ten completely different things about your case.

Portuguese justice is a “justice” made and exercised by crooks and imbeciles.

I became extremely angry and revolted, but at the same time, of course, very hopeful of recovering my stolen money. I contacted another law firm, the second one after five years since the crime took place, and curiously all the nefarious, financial and psychological consequences were on me and my family, while the thief was away all these years, I imagine, just enjoying a great and luxurious life, traveling with his “divorced” wife and with my money and the money of all the other victims he stole with total impunity!

These lawyers also told me at the first meeting that I could certainly recover my stolen money from all these exposed assets and his bank accounts, including interest and compensation (surely, I thought, at least I’m entitled to that).
These lawyers also investigated the past of this crook and his company, in that sense they did more than my previous “hotshot” lawyers in Lisbon, and only then, after five years, I discovered to my great surprise that he had been doing the exact same thing to countless other victims for three years before me, in addition to the other two victims my previous lawyers had uncovered, There were probably dozens and dozens of lawsuits against him (we will never know the exact number, because in Portugal the lawsuits are constantly criminally dismissed by the courts as if they were ghosts, or the victims don’t even press charges due to justice being extremely expensive, lengthy and above all totally inconsequential, A FRAUD) and his company for the appropriation of very large sums of money, but they all ended with the same result for everyone. The perpetrator was always cleared of any wrongdoing with the tired and very convenient excuse they always used, “there was no malice”, and the cases were dropped again and again, this happened to ALL the lawsuits filed by ALL the other victims!
This is very revealing about the deeply corrupted nature of the Portuguese judicial system and its loathsome criminal judges, who never act on behalf of the victim, but act in great haste to shield and protect the criminal from his victims. It’s all a total farce!

Once again, I had to pay thousands of euros more to lawyers and another incomprehensible thousands of euros more to Portuguese courts to file another appeal, and then I was scammed again! This is life in Portugal! In Poortugal, one way or another, you are always paying crooks for nothing. Just because almost everyone and everything in Portugal is a crook/idiot and a fraud! One after the other, there’s no real choice!

A victim in Portugal is always to be shared.

It’s unbelievable how a single country can be so full of crooks and imbeciles, yet Portugal is exactly like that.

Typical Portuguese Coffee Shop
Fancy a coffee inside a plastic bag? | The Real Portugal
The first case was very strange and unusually quickly and brutally dismissed, as if it was something poisonous for the judges, it was thrown directly into the dustbin of justice.
The judge’s letter justifying the dismissal was full of gross errors, for example, the defendant’s last name was completely wrong, and the address of his company was also replaced by another address, as the judge also said that the company was foreign, just because the company had a German name (how stupid can that be?!), also the judge had the audacity to say that there was no wrongdoing, because this gentleman (the thief) was just rebuilding his life! Yes! you heard that right! What an insulting, despicable, dishonest and mentally deficient response so typical of the people of this sh*tty country! Is this a response from a court in a democracy?! Is this a judge?! The thief is rebuilding his life with my money and the five million euros he stole from the other victims! Also, the rejection of the appeal was totally illegal, I had the right to at least be heard, but in Portugal crooked judges are the first in line to break the law, and everyone in Portugal is very ok with that, including the profiteering Portuguese lawyers, as they so confidently told me that judges can disobey the law if they want, they very conveniently call it “interpretation”, but it is obvious to anyone with two brain cells that interpretation cannot be BREAKING the law! This is Portugal, a total cuckoo’s nest!

In Portugal, the law is not set in stone, it will depend on many other much more “important” things, such as: if the judge received a good bribe; if he/she is covering for his/her peers; if he/she is not envious of you; which side he/she woke up on that day; if he/she had a good lunch; if he/she worked less than an hour that day, otherwise he/she will be exhausted; if he/she is totally brain dead; and so on…

This judge also spoke another unbelievable stupidity like the criminal court is the last resort. So for Portuguese judges there are no crimes, there are only civil disputes, being them; rape, robbery, corruption, whatever, every crime must be resolved in a civil agreement. In any real country, a crime is a crime and a civil suit is a civil suit, but it seems that for the profoundly mentally deficient (I have to use this classification because it’s the only way to accurately describe the abominable idiotic actions beyond any comprehension of these Portuguese people), lazy and corrupt judges, every crime is just a civil suit, that it’s just a ploy that only serves to drag out cases for twenty years, if you’re lucky and don’t file/dismiss right away.
So off we went again, we had to appeal in just 10 business days! And more free money from me to all the courts and lawyers!

If criminal actions in Portugal are already worthless, then civil actions are also guaranteed to be a complete and utter scam. You literally pay fortunes to receive inconsequential court documents so that you can hang them on your wall as if they were diplomas.

Victims are the most profitable business in Portugal.

There is nothing more dangerous and nefarious than a Portuguese with power.

The appeal was accepted by the Supreme Court, and then we had a hearing that was scheduled in a very tight time frame of only one week (with no possibility to reschedule), obviously with the malicious intent of impairing and fatally damaging the victims’ ability to present their case and gather witnesses in time, in addition to disrupting my schedule and that of my lawyer. It is also very strange that the witnesses of the victims are not informed of the quality of the summaries made by the court, let alone the content of the case, as a result of which many witnesses do not appear, and also because many of them live in extremely distant cities, as was the case with us, several witnesses did not appear.
These crooked Portuguese judges act like criminals and dictators and never in good faith, they are not judges who try to apply law and justice and ensure the healthy functioning of society, these scum are only there to serve themselves in every possible way!

Christmas on a street in Portugal
Christmas street in Portugal, probably the best Christmas in the world! | The Real Portugal
The hearing in the Portuguese court was the most insulting, disrespectful and humiliating situation I have ever experienced in my life. We clearly felt that we were not welcome, on the contrary, it was obvious that we were a huge nuisance to the court and we always felt that we, the victims, were being treated as if the court was doing us a favor! After all these years, my lawyer managed, with great difficulty, to contact and gather eight other valuable witnesses who had also been robbed of very large sums, some even more than me, by this thief. The stories they told were remarkably similar to mine, which only confirms that there was a pattern in the way these criminals defrauded their clients, the owner of the company and its CEO (coincidentally his brother!), the latter who, outrageously, was never charged by the court, although he was the one who interacted and told the same lies to all the victims, with the clear objective of defrauding us and stealing our money.

The first thing that struck my wife and I was the way the Portuguese judge entered the courtroom and as soon as he sat down he immediately started talking about him and how the doorman could tell his mood just by looking at him, he even asked if we had seen him on TV (WTF does that matter?!).

So, before asking me about the trial, he asked me, in what I felt was a condescending tone, but it could just be typical Portuguese rudeness, if I watch TV news (actually I can’t stand watching Portuguese TV, it’s a nauseating parade of rubbish TV shows and propaganda disguised as journalism), because he had been on TV and he was very worried that I had missed this extraordinary event (?!). He asked me how many years I had been married, and I said many years because I didn’t know the exact number, and then everyone started laughing, first the judge, then the prosecutor (public ministry), the thief’s official lawyer, and even my lawyer! The witnesses were not in the courtroom, only my wife, who was also a witness. The laughter was so offensive and uncalled for. (I felt like they were treating me and my wife like clowns and as if we were complaining that we’d been robbed of an ice cream, and it wasn’t just them, but everybody else was treating us that way.)

Needless to say, the judge never asked us victims how this tragedy actually affected our lives, on a personal, family, financial and psychological level. Of course, he couldn’t care less!

When a witness testified, the Portuguese judge had the nerve to tell the audience, “People believe in anything…” clearly blaming the present victims rather than the fraudster. Mr. Portuguese judge, in any developed country you can do business regardless of the amount involved, including amounts incomparably and infinitely higher than these ones, because people are generally honest and serious, and if something goes wrong, which of course it could, the courts and judges are there to do their fundamental job of keeping society healthy, safe, fair and and free of cancerous criminals, that’s why these countries are infinitely superior to the sh*thole Poortugal, swamped by crooks and judges like you, who don’t do their job, definitely the most vital job in any real democracy. This judge is obviously an imbecile as well as a crook. In the end, don’t doubt that these scoundrels in the Portuguese justice system, like judges, prosecutors and lawyers, are truly delighted to see the victims have their lives ruined, because it brings out the evil personality that most Portuguese have. This happens all the time in the putrid Portuguese courts, it is standard behavior, they outrageously blame the victims and acquit the criminals who leave the courtroom laughing in their victims’ faces. In Portugal, this happens in all areas, including rape and domestic violence. What a repugnant “country”!

My wife and I had the distinct feeling as if we were in some courtroom in the former Soviet Union or in Fidel Castro’s Cuba.

Instead of investigating and seeking evidence of the crime committed, Portuguese courts, in an ad hoc manner, often look for and “fabricate” the guilt of the victim, the target of the crime.

Facades of Portuguese buildings in very poor condition
These streets would make a great backdrop for an episode of The Walking Dead! (Of course, there are also very nice and modern apartments and houses, but these are only affordable by a very small minority of privileged people with salaries and wealth far above the Portuguese average). | The Real Portugal
It is so perverted that there was a scumbag Portuguese judge who said that raped women, instead of screaming and crying while being raped, should take pleasure in the sexual act! So as not to make things worse, he said!

A Portuguese judge was infamous for repeatedly and always acquitting all men who came before him accused of beating their wives. It is obvious that this was also his favorite “sport” at home, using his wife as a punching bag, and I dare not imagine what else.

Another Portuguese judge gave the following horrific sentence (this is the norm in Portugal) in another case of domestic violence: Judge forces aggressor to dine with victim. “You can be as violent as you want, you buy dinner and some flowers and that’s it!” I should say that this came from a FEMALE judge who followed the recommendation of the prosecutor, another WOMAN! The Portuguese are so vile that not even women are sympathetic towards other women.

These three examples are just a drop in the ocean of the most corrupt and mind-bogglingly stupid Portuguese “justice”. As expected from the very cowardly and conniving Portuguese population, there were absolutely no protests, except for a few inconsequential comments. Such sentences are obviously a direct attack on human rights and democracy!

My wife and I were completely shocked and so disgusted by this behavior, we have suffered so much in the last six years and spent so much money without getting any compensation and yet they were laughing like it was a comedy, the judge was only concerned if we had all seen him on TV. It seemed as if the court hearing was about him and not about the victims.
This corrupt prosecutor was blatantly sent there by the other corrupt judges to defend this criminal on behalf of all the previous judges who had criminally acquitted him and whatever else we don’t know, but strongly suspect. The thief wasn’t even there, because the court didn’t even bother to contact him at the correct address (although that was probably my lawyer’s fault too), because the Portuguese court knows that it’s just going to be a grudgingly staged hearing from the start. I was furious that I had to pay many more thousands of Euros to the corrupt Portuguese court and my useless lawyers (for this staged court hearing), and yet this criminal not only did not have to travel and appear in court, but was entitled to a defense by the corrupt Portuguese State/Public Prosecutor (dearly paid by the taxpayers), in addition to his court-appointed official lawyer, and on top of that, without having to spend a single euro.

When Portuguese judges systematically fail to deliver justice, they are actually doing the opposite; they are convicting the victims to life sentences. Which certainly gives these fake Portuguese judges and prosecutors great joy.

I was petrified and furious to hear the Portuguese prosecutor defend this thief, and with blatant lies! The thief stole more than five million euros (probably much more, since many victims do not report because they know in advance that they will not get justice, and many charges are simply ignored by the criminal justice system in Portugal and literally thrown in the trash bin so that no one will ever know), but the corrupt Portuguese courts hid the information of so many victims for at least three years, and the court knew all about it all the time, instead of convicting him and shutting down his fraudulent company much longer ago, thus preventing many other victims besides me from ever being deceived and having their lives completely ruined, but that is exactly what the Portuguese love to do to each other, especially when they have some power in their hands over others, with the opportunity to destroy people’s lives and inflict unnecessary suffering.

The Portuguese in general are very petty and envious people full of character flaws, so when people like that have some power over others, they become a threat to those they have the power to hurt.

The hearing was strangely very quick, the judge asked very few questions to anyone and to me, he talked more about his TV appearance and other nonsense, besides laughing very disrespectfully, than I had the opportunity to speak to the court as it is my legal right.

So when the prosecutor opened her mouth, I had an epiphany that, without knowing it, I had been living in a dictatorship all these years. The role of a public prosecutor in any democratic country is to protect society from criminals; in Portugal his role is to protect criminals from their victims and society, which includes protecting other corrupt Portuguese judges and other corrupt public prosecutors. This scoundrel, in order to absolve the scoundrel who stole more than five million euros, went so far as to say (without any proof to support this, of course, just her opinion, yes, in Portuguese courts, opinions to acquit criminals, carry more MUCH MORE weight than evidence and facts!) that the money was stolen by the cashier (when all the money was obviously transferred to the bank account of the company thief (with his name on it), no victim sent money to the cashier’s bank account), she also had the nerve to say that it was the German company from which he should have imported the machines that stole our money! In this regard, one of the victim-witnesses even said that the German company had contacted him by email to say that they had not yet received the money from the Portuguese company, which probably made the victim’s heart stop when he found out about it! I saw that when the prosecutor was questioning the witness and heard him say this, she quickly waved her hand to signal him not to continue talking about this very inconvenient episode, you can imagine that I had to grip my chair very tightly to stay still. Of course, the sly Portuguese judge was silent as a grave when he heard all these blatant lies from the prosecutor, without ever interrupting and questioning her, as is his duty.

Typical Portuguese cafe with terrace
A Portuguese café with a terrace but that seems to be located in some African country. | The Real Portugal
In Portuguese courts, opinions and lies are much more important than facts. Facts are irrelevant and a BIG nuisance to judges and prosecutors.

There is nothing more stupid and criminal in the world than a Portuguese judge.
Actually, most Portuguese should never be allowed to be judges, prosecutors, or lawyers, because they are simply totally unfit to perform these functions, which require extraordinary ethics, morals, intelligence, and common sense, the exact OPPOSITE of what most Portuguese are, but above all, honesty.

In Portugal you hear all the time from lawyers, commentators and the average Joe that any kind of crime is “very difficult to prove”. (how convenient that is…)

The Portuguese have a lot of inferiority complexes, which is why they are such envious people. Portuguese can be jealous and envious of just about anything. It is a very pronounced character flaw of the Portuguese in general. However, I don’t have the slightest idea why anyone would be jealous of me and my wife.

I was so shocked when, at the end of the sham hearing, I saw my Portuguese lawyer having a very happy and laughing conversation with the corrupt prosecutor that I said, “Did you see what she did? This prosecutor defended a criminal and lied!” And suddenly my sleazy lawyer replied, “She was just doing her job! So it is confirmed that Portuguese prosecutors exist to protect criminals from their victims at all costs, including blatantly lying to the court.
My Portuguese lawyer shamelessly acted as if she was at a party, all that was missing was a glass of champagne!

Portuguese streets completely dirty and neglected by city council services
Typical Portuguese street, full of garbage and completely neglected by the municipal services. | The Real Portugal
In Portugal you don’t have the option of not paying a crook and an idiot, simply because you can’t find honest and competent people in Portugal, so few are they.

After a few days the verdict was released and guess what it was! Yes, you got it right! The case was dismissed AGAIN, he was not even acquitted because there was no chance of a trial! Even with all the glaring evidence of the “insolvent” thief living in lavish wealth, and the eight victims and witnesses basically telling the same story, once again it didn’t matter, the dishonest Portuguese judge gave the same mentally deficient reason as all the other crooked Portuguese judges years before; “there was no crime, there was no malice, only breach of contract”. So now the world knows that stealing in Portugal is not stealing, it is a breach of contract, but even that is a big lie, because in Portugal it is the same as saying, f*ck you! Because nothing will happen to the thief and you’ll never see your money again!

In Portugal you are surrounded everywhere by criminally minded people for whom there is no difference at all between good and evil, right and wrong.

Portugal is a country basically made up entirely of criminals and connivers (of all kinds and all degrees).

Therefore, if you are the victim of a crime in Portugal, you have no choice but to seek help from other equally criminal people (and still pay them dearly), but who cynically wear the mantle of the “law”, such as lawyers and courts in general.

The Portuguese judges know very well that no victim will get back a single euro because there is no more company and the thief declares himself “insolvent” which in Portugal means untouchable and literally protected by the law and therefore impossible for the victims to recover the stolen money (regardless of whether the thief lives in a mansion or not and other glaring signs of wealth in plain sight, the authorities don’t give a sh*t about these “signs” and therefore will do nothing to help the victims recover a single euro of their stolen money).

Portuguese law also very conveniently makes it as easy as possible for criminals to evade the obligation to pay their debts later, through obscure and extremely “convenient” slimy laws full of trap doors around the amount of share capital and partner quota, like for example the thief could owe (stolen) millions of euros and by law the thief is only obliged to return 500 euros to you, in any idiotic Portuguese civil court!

As we can see, there are millions of ways to steal “legally” in this despicable country.
Be afraid, be very afraid to bring your money to Portugal! Just don’t, NEVER EVER, please!

However, I have become many tens of thousands of euros poorer, wasted many years, laughed at, scorned and humiliated by the corrupt Portuguese courts and the “justice” system in general, including my Portuguese swindler lawyers, who all the time bizarrely found it all very funny! All this torture over six years of being blackmailed by all those Portuguese scum who hunt victims like hyenas, waiting for the best moment to bite you and take the last piece of you.

In Portugal, you get the real feeling that everyone is just pretending to be someone, acting like a character. An example is lawyers, deep down they are not lawyers, they have no idea what they are doing, what the law is, what is right and what is wrong, I mean in the deepest deontological understanding of the profession, not superficially, so they just act as lawyers in front of you to get the most money from you for as long as possible, until you go bankrupt. This happens in every profession. IN PORTUGAL NOTHING IS REALLY REAL AND AUTHENTIC, AT MOST IT’S JUST A THIN VENEER, ENOUGH TO DECEIVE YOU.

Tragically, it is only when it is too late that you realize that almost everything in Poortugal ends up being a scam or a fake or, at most, painfully mediocre, because it is everywhere and it is so “normal” and prevalent all over place that it is very difficult to recognize it in time to avoid it and also because we have to get on with our lives, and so sometimes we have to risk doing something.

Most Portuguese only care about knowing as little as possible about their professions in order to swindle money from others. The Portuguese have no passion for anything, although they are very passionate about taking what belongs to others.

Portuguese kiosk and clothing store in deplorable condition
How can these “stores” even be open? Only in Poortugal… | The Real Portugal
It was as if six years of our lives had been kidnapped into an endless, agonizing nightmare, as if they never existed because we’ll never, NEVER get them back, and that’s what I mourn the most, not the money, although I need it quite badly, of course.
This is what Poortugal does to people’s lives… It obliterates them!

What I regret the most is the toll, the heavy sadness and a lot of anger and revolt at not having justice and finally finding out that everything was hidden from me that was inflicted on our personal lives for so many years, feeling like basically everyone was ripping us off and laughing at us and financially it was catastrophic for me. In addition to the €85,000 that was stolen from me, I was further cheated out of another €45,000 by the corrupt Portuguese courts and the totally useless Portuguese lawyers in exorbitant fees and I NEVER RECEIVED A CENT BACK effectively, neither did any of the countless other Portuguese victims!).

In Portugal, you’re guaranteed to pay first-world fees to receive the most abject and execrable third-world treatment (but it’s actually much worse).

Portugal is a miserable and rogue country that cheats the EU with distorted and false statistics to show much less crime (particularly corruption and financial) than the real numbers. Nauseatingly corrupt and incompetent Portuguese judges are systematically dismissing criminal cases to also trick the EU (and the world) into putting more money into their corrupt pockets by portraying Portugal as a peaceful and lawful country, which is the complete opposite of reality. The Portuguese State does this with all the “important” statistics (distorted by infinite factors along the entire path of capture, on purpose or out of sheer incompetence). They deceive the EU and the very stupid Portuguese believe or pretend to believe what the corrupt Portuguese politicians tell them, because for most Portuguese, corruption is not only not condemned, but also something very coveted to pursue as a career. (A Portuguese person have told me personally, in a very convicted way that “corruption is a good thing”. So scary!)

The Portuguese justice system is so inept and corrupt that most victims do not even press charges. This in itself greatly reduces the actual number of crimes reported in Portugal. Everything in Portugal is a fallacy, always much bigger than one might think!

Obviously, this crime would NEVER have happened in a truly developed and democratic country, as the thief would have been easily caught and arrested in the first or second fraud, preventing this scoundrel from stealing more victims and needlessly destroying so many lives, including my own family’s! This thief didn’t even have an organized accounting or track of his payments, he had very conveniently fired his bookkeeper (only in the unspeakable Poortugal can you run a business for years without a bookkeeper and organized accounting, and steal people at the same time! Committing the same crime over and over again!) During all these three years, he stole so many innocent victims behind the false normality of the corporate façade, with the full blessing of the Portuguese judges, who were too busy trying to acquit him faster than the complaints and appeals were flowing into the courts.

What is amazing is that this thief and his henchman CEO didn’t even bother to come up with an elaborate scheme to steal, because the Portuguese courts simply AUTHORIZED them to keep the clients money ad hoc all these years. (I don’t even know how to comment on this, it’s beyond any human comprehension and only in the Poortuguese sh*thole!)

I have a clear idea that in many cases Portuguese judges do not even read the files/processes, only the titles and names of the participants, because an astronomical percentage of cases are acquitted, either dismissed or thrown in the trash.

These crooked and idiotic Portuguese judges never bothered to investigate or ask the banks or him about his account movements, because they don’t give a damn about the victims, they just had to FOLLOW the money to find out everything! It is so easy to see that everything was stolen by the owner of the company. It is obvious that he just took the money out of the bank accounts for himself, so simple and so stupid as this! It is so heinous and criminal that the Portuguese courts never demanded any proof or investigation of where the money was spent, he claimed he didn’t have it, and that was enough for the Portuguese judges to acquit him every single time! Right, five million euros just smoked like five euros! No big deal to the corrupt Portuguese judges! NO VICTIM EVER KNEW WHERE HIS/HER MONEY WENT! The thief still presents himself as insolvent and the judge does not even care why he is living a lavish life in a big modern country house with at least two luxury cars (which I could recognize), he also has a new business, and HOW CAN HE BE INSOLVENT AND RICH AT THE SAME TIME as he has never been before?! The dirty Portuguese judge scorned and dismissed everything, including this luxurious new life of his, as if it didn’t exist at all, as if we were all crazy and everything was a figment of our imagination. (And what I and all the other victims don’t and can’t possibly know about the thief’s luxurious life during all these years?)

Very dirty Portuguese streets
You might think these are streets in Cairo, but no, these are Portuguese streets in Portugal’s capital, Lisbon. Plenty poverty and filth. | The Real Portugal
I was horrified to discover that in Poortugal this type of scam is as common as apples, it is a well known scheme, in fact it doesn’t even have to be a scheme, it is a no brainer, in Portugal the crooks just have to keep and steal the victims money AS THEY ARE SURE THAT NOTHING WILL EVER HAPPEN TO THEM, that’s it! The crooks steal all the money they can behind the façade of ANY, really any, legitimate business, from the innocent victims, as well as from their suppliers and their own employees, who never get a dime back from these scumbags. Then all they have to do is file for bankruptcy, or sometimes they don’t even have to bother, because it’s some victim who managed and was lucky enough to file for the fraudulent company’s bankruptcy, which is obviously totally useless.

THEN ALL THESE CRIMINALS GET RICH OVERNIGHT WITH ALL THE MONEY THEY STOLE! And certainly, also a lot of judges and other scoundrels along the way…

The criminal and sloppy behavior of these Portuguese courts greatly ENCOURAGES more and more criminals to steal innocent victims with total impunity. (I would say that this is often intentional)
IN PORTUGAL CRIME PAYS, AND PAYS A LOT! (TO A LOT OF PEOPLE!)

When it is no longer possible to sustain the scheme, the thieves file fraudulent bankruptcies and run off with everyone’s stolen money and then file their own personal fake bankruptcies so that no victim can ever get their money back. This happens every day in Portugal and these criminals never go to prison and most of the time they are not even tried. It happens in all areas such as; various businesses, real estate, car dealerships, car rentals, dental clinics, really any type of business you can think of can be a scam behind the façade and it doesn’t matter anything if that business (fraud) is very well referenced in society, media, etc…. This means absolutely NOTHING in Poortugal!

Essentially, you can be scammed in Portugal anywhere, by anyone, at anytime, as it is so widespread and ingrained throughout Portuguese society as plain normality, that it becomes almost impossible to detect in time to avoid being scammed/defrauded, sooner or later. The only way to avoid it is to do nothing in Portugal, except plans to flee asap.

Portugal is just a filthy bag of corrupt, thieves, swindlers, scams, scumbags, scoundrels, losers, liars, backstabbers, basically the worst of the worst of humanity is concentrated and amalgamated in this stinking cesspool, like I’ve never seen anywhere else in the world!

There is no country in the world with more scum per capita than Portugal.

It is TOTALLY IMPOSSIBLE for any normal and decent human being to live in Portugal!

There is never any reliable information available, on the contrary, most of the time, you even get strong and misleading positive references, even if the fraudulent entity is often already buried in lawsuits gathering dust in the courts.

Portugal is a nightmare of a nightmare!

Portugal is a paradise for crooks and a hell on Earth for honest and decent people.
Portuguese courts are mostly nothing more than crooks judging (helping) other crooks and sometimes the judges are just plain retarded, and that is why it never ends well for the victims.

I would like to talk about my horrible experiences with Portuguese lawyers and why you should never hire one, even if you really need one, because in the end you will just, very very likely, lose everything anyway because of the corrupt courts! (Sure, there are competent and honest Portuguese lawyers, but they are a very small minority, sadly I would say probably no more than one in a hundred).
The first time you naively pay Portuguese lawyers, thinking that they are some educated and intelligent people who will help you out, but in the end, when it is too late, you realize that you have paid a fortune, not only to swindlers, but also to mentally retarded, in the sense of extremely stupid situations, you will know why in the following paragraphs. The thing is that these sickening events often occur with the vast majority of Portuguese people, regardless of their profession.
When you meet them for the first time, they will tell you that you are a victim of a serious crime and illegality and that it is guaranteed, I stress guaranteed, that you will get justice, just pay your fees and everything will be resolved.
Note that they don’t show their true colors at the first meeting, or at least the worst ones, only after they receive your money.
My last two Portuguese lawyers were both female and they were particularly prolific in throwing garbage out of their mouths almost every time I spoke with them.

Portuguese cars
Probably almost half of the Portuguese car fleet is more or less in this decrepit state. What I find really strange is how these cars pass the mandatory inspection, although I highly suspect. The great danger that this poses to us EU citizens is the fact that Portugal is in the EU, so these cars, obviously not roadworthy, can automatically be driven in other member states and become a threat to other people’s safety. | The Real Portugal
Only in Portugal is it possible to practice any profession without absolutely any in-depth knowledge of that profession, deontology and ethics, and these two lawyers were the perfect example of that.

And this happens, because in Portugal almost everyone, collectively speaking, very strangely, shares the same mindset in terms of Stone Age way of thinking, innate dishonesty and limitless mediocrity. The bar is very, very low indeed. So, in the end, you never truly have better options to choose from, they’re all execrably bad!

Talking to most Portuguese people about anything serious is exasperating, it feels like a fight and not a conversation and in the end you feel exhausted and deeply frustrated because most of the time it is literally like talking to walls. The truth is that most Portuguese are generally quite dumb and don’t understand very simple and common sense things.
During the few meetings and phone conversations we had, I realized that these lawyers were a mixture of unleashed imbecility and dishonesty at its worst when they said and did things like the following examples:

I must say that I am still in doubt as to whether these lawyers were more crooks than idiots, or more idiots than crooks, because I even liked some of the things they did in the process, though mostly because the case was obviously and blatantly incriminating from the start, the problem is that overall they proved to be shockingly disrespectful and rude, and generally deeply incompetent overall as well as shamelessly dishonest throughout their work and relationship with me.

When I was on the phone with one of them and asked about the compensation, she said the first shocking stupidity; that I must (cannot) ask for more than €10,000 (for a theft of €85,000 almost six years ago), otherwise the process loses credibility! And she added, this is not America, and then giggled! (WTF is she talking about?), which means that in Portugal the victims are coerced banks and they are only entitled to receive interest for the theft. The victims don’t suffer anything more, their lives are not affected in any way, according to the Portuguese courts and lawyers.
Anyway, even this is another blatant lie, because no one ever gets a single cent back!, but every victim has certainly spent a fortune, and their life turns every day, for endless years, into an agonizing nightmare and terrible misery.
The other lawyer had the nerve to tell me, the victim, in an implicit way, that it’s good to have a lot of crooks and criminals in general because it gives her more work. In addition to the shameless dishonesty and lack of ethics, this shows the typical deep stupidity and short-sightedness of most Portuguese. She would rather watch the whole forest burn down, just to be hired to put out one burning tree (but of course she doesn’t even do that). I’m sure she liked the criminal much more than me.

That’s why everyone loves scum in Portugal, the scum gives a lot of money to win to other scum from the proceeds of crime.

Portuguese justice works like a Ponzi scheme. That’s the plain truth!

She also said in court, but outside the courtroom just before the hearing, in the presence of the witnesses, who were all immensely robbed and in great pain, that if someone is going to steal, he/she should steal big time, and then she laughed and giggled like a moron! (I know it’s hard to believe, but it’s true! This really happened, but coming from a Portuguese, is nothing to be surprised about!) I had a hard time controlling myself. She also said (almost shouted) to me in the same place, when I said that the court had failed miserably to protect victims and society from these crooks in the three years before I was stolen, she responded to me very harshly and angrily, “The court never failed! My blood was boiling! (Mind you, I was in the courthouse while listening to these execrable taunts). Of course, she doesn’t care whether all these people have had their lives destroyed or not, she just wants to know how she can get more of my money out of my pockets. It’s the only thing a Portuguese lawyer thinks about above all else.
This very stupid lawyer also told me on the phone when I asked why the court didn’t investigate the trail of the stolen money, because surely he just withdrew it in cash or diverted it to other accounts. She very rudely replied to me, “He could take all the money he wanted from the company and do whatever he wanted with it!” This is a crime, and is called embezzlement, but this Portuguese “lawyer” doesn’t even know what that is! Unbelievable! So the thief takes the client’s money to his house and makes it his own, and this totally idiotic and retarded Portuguese “lawyer” has just told me that embezzlement is legal in Portugal! Yes, this is a typical Portuguese lawyer of the highest caliber! Only in retarded Poortugal! What can I say about this?! This is the so typical and omnipresent Portuguese mental retardation that is embedded in the whole Portuguese society in general, i.e. extremely stupid answers that I am talking about. It’s impossible to have a meaningful conversation with them! Never in my life have I heard such an insane amount of stupidity, in this case coming out of the mouths of Portuguese people in general, as when I lived in Portugal! Just stay very, very far away from them in order to keep your sanity!

This lawyer also told me that the Portuguese courts acquit cases just to reduce the volume of their work, adding that this behavior is perfectly justified and necessary. Yes! She said that too! Otherwise, I say, the poor Portuguese judges will have to work more and like most Portuguese they hate to work. (Absolutely unbelievable! The nerve (more like retardness) to say that to my face!)

Abandoned industrial complexes in Portugal
There are thousands of such abandoned industrial complexes all over Portugal, and they remain abandoned forever because there are very few industrial companies healthy and large enough to occupy these sites. It should be noted that these places are located around and very close to Lisbon, and even so no one picks them up. | The Real Portugal
My wife told the lawyer that when we went to the company’s premises she thought it was strange that the lights were off, promptly the lawyer yelled, “You can’t say that because the judge will accuse you that it was your fault and not his! (the crook who stole your money). Of course, this information is irrelevant or at most circumstantial against the criminal, as it is obvious to any human being with at least two brain cells, but now you know that for the Portuguese it is a factor in absolving a swindler! Lights out when you are being swindled! These ultra absurd situations are so typical of most Portuguese people, their brains are definitely wired upside down and it is impossible to reason with them because they are so limited that they are not even able to understand why you don’t accept these deeply insulting and preposterous responses to your intelligence and keep your mouth shut as if you were just another stupid and submissive Portuguese like them.
This lawyer also had the audacity to tell me that I could not call the thief who stole €85,000 from me a swindler and a thief. There it is, the mental deficiency striking again and again, and again…! Truly infuriating!

In Portugal, you are constantly being provoked, which requires enormous self-control to avoid punching a lot of people.

The only thing that matches the level of crookedness of most Portuguese is their level of stupidity.

At the meeting before the last hearing, she looked at my wife and had the unbelievable rudeness of almost yelling at her, “Don’t lie in court! I started to boil inside and I just wanted to leave the room, but I couldn’t do anything because I had a court hearing the next day and of course I was desperate to get my stolen money back and my life was hanging on these two despicable women (and they knew it). In Portugal you are always cornered because wherever you look in Portugal, there are always other crooks and idiots just waiting for you to open your wallet, you really have no one to turn to, these two lawyers were not bad luck, THIS IS THE RULE and just how the overwhelming majority of Portuguese people are. Behind every door you knock on, there is an outstanding probability that there is another crook and idiot waiting for you to rip you off, just like the one you talked to before. In Portugal, there really are no DECENT alternatives, because there are so few that you will never find them!

In Portugal, it’s you against almost an entire population that is a mixture of evil and mental deficiency. You don’t stand a chance.
The simple truth is that most Portuguese are genetically very low quality people, and that is the only reason they are so dishonest and stupid.

Living in Portugal is literally like trying to build a life inside a madhouse and a sewer (humanly speaking).

As the other lawyer had asked us to do at our first meeting, my wife and I had spent weeks painstakingly gathering and organizing information about the thief’s assets on the Internet to send to the courts in hopes of getting our money back (of course, it was a very painful task to do because it hurt a lot to see the thief living a life of luxury with our stolen money in complete impunity). I emailed the PDF files and emails very well organized with lots of explanations to the lawyer, which took us at least two weeks to accomplish. I found out later in the meeting that she didn’t even open the files or read the emails because she said with the greatest audacity, “There were so maaany fileees…”. I just wanted to run away so I wouldn’t do anything to her that I might (or probably wouldn’t) regret later.
Portuguese lawyers are very fond of saying (in the end they glorify the criminals and insult the victims in their presence) that thieves and crooks are not crooks and thieves, and we are talking about criminals (Portuguese from all walks of life show the same behavior), but rather they are called very smart and sophisticated people, including by my lawyers ad nauseam, and every time I had to hear it I was deeply offended, they also said the same thing about some well-known corrupt Portuguese politicians, who by the way are all free. No wonder Poortugal is such a stinking cesspool!
The Portuguese have a hard time calling bad people for what they really are, on the contrary, they treat them as very honorable and even funny people, and the Portuguese actually admire them, and that’s because most Portuguese can relate to this scum, because most Portuguese are scum too.

At one of the meetings, one of the lawyers said that judges can decide whatever they want, regardless of the letter of the law.
This is extremely serious! It means that there is in fact NO RULE OF LAW IN PORTUGAL and that the courts are a farce! The EU urgently needs to know what is going on in Portugal and act accordingly!

Some Portuguese lawyers like to laugh in your face and make indirect jokes about your terrible situation, showing absolutely no respect and empathy for your pain and loss, just like judges and prosecutors do when they are in the presence of victims. This is typical behavior. Certainly because they know that they are getting richer in inverse proportion to the victims becoming exponentially poorer.

Nevertheless, the case was lost, not because of the abysmal stupidity and rudeness of these lawyers, but because the verdict was already predetermined, no matter what was being said and presented in the courtroom. The Portuguese court, full of despicable people, has never been interested in doing justice. It’s only there to serve itself and its crooked “friends”. The sentence was decided long before the trial. This happens systematically in Portuguese courts!
After that sham trial, I couldn’t do anything to change my fate. In Portugal, you are always a hostage, whenever you need help, you are always robbed by everyone and everywhere, especially by those you need the most, but who are so eager to take advantage of your harrowing situation.
Because Portugal is so small, I was forced to live my life just a few kilometers away from the thief’s luxurious life at the expense of my €85,000, as well as the other five million plus euros he stole from so many people, and I couldn’t do absolutely NOTHING against him, not even call him a thief, because then, according to the disgusting Portuguese courts, I would be committing the terrible crime of defaming such a virtuous man, and I, the victim who was stolen from, would then be prosecuted by the thief, and consequently I would be forced to pay the thief even more money, on top of the money he had already stolen from me. Absolutely infuriating!

This is the Portugal of the 21st century and HOW is this cesspool a member of the EU?! The EU MUST get rid of this filthy Portuguese dictatorship run by criminals for criminals as soon as possible!

This criminal who stole more than five million euros was never registered as a criminal, but only as a poor innocent insolvent person, that is why in Portugal the corrupt are not corrupt, thieves are not thieves, criminals are not criminals, because nothing is registered and nobody is ever charged, and therefore the official statistics are overwhelmingly false.

So the Portuguese official statistics probably show only 1% of the reality, and of course this is done on PURPOSE. Don’t doubt it!

In Portugal, criminals do not have a criminal record!

U N B E L I E V A B L E !
Here is the summary and chronology of all the glaring illegalities committed by the corrupt Portuguese courts and their corrupt Portuguese judges, only possible in a DICTATORSHIP!

The swindler had been stealing from his victims with total impunity for at least three years before I was robbed.
In all that time, the Portuguese courts accumulated the cases of the numerous victims who had been stolen from them, so they were well aware of the dramatic situation of the victims.
In all this time the Portuguese courts did nothing to stop this criminal.
In all this time, the criminal was always acquitted of any wrongdoing.
In all this time, the corrupt Portuguese courts never bothered to investigate the fraudulent company, its employees, suppliers and even customers in order to find out the truth (and the stolen money!), absolutely nothing, ZERO diligence!
In all this time, dozens and dozens (yet we will never know the real number) of victims have desperately filed very expensive appeals to no avail. The cases have always been criminally dismissed or acquitted by the Portuguese courts, thus DENYING THE ELEMENTARY HUMAN RIGHT OF CITIZENS TO ACCESS JUSTICE! (just like a dictatorship!)
The accomplice CEO of the company (his brother), the one who talked and lied to everyone, was not even indicted in the lawsuits.
A month before I was robbed, the company was already officially declared insolvent.
The insolvency was requested by a victim, rather, as it should be, by the owners of the company.
After their “company” was officially declared insolvent, these crooks continued to steal from people with total impunity for several more months until they finally closed the doors.
In all this time these criminals did not even have an accountant or any sort of organized bookkeeping (how convenient).
In all this time the fraudulent criminal company never fulfilled its tax and social security obligations.
The corrupt Portuguese courts never did any investigation or audit to trace the victims’ money. (My Portuguese lawyer, “it’s really hard to call her a lawyer because she really isn’t, only in Poortugal she could be”, literally and with great arrogance told me that he (the thief) can do whatever he wants with the money, like, withdraw all his clients’ money from his bank accounts and take it to home, i.e. embezzlement IS LEGAL in Portugal! Wow!)
Documentary, factual and undeniable evidence such as; contracts, proof of payment, email exchanges, etc. have been completely ignored and despised by Portuguese courts and judges, as if they didn’t even exist.
The state prosecutor blatantly lied in court to protect the criminal and the other corrupt judges, and the judge just kept silent, like (without any proof); accusing the German company and the employee of having stolen the money, when all the victims had deposited the payments into the thief’s bank account, and then all the money was “magically” vanished.
He stole more than five million euros. (but probably much more, as it is usual in Portugal, you only know the surface of things)
The crook declared himself insolvent immediately after his fraudulent company closed its doors, but he has never been so wealthy! He lives in a luxurious modern villa in a very expensive area. He owns at least two high-end cars, including an SUV. He has started another “company”. This is just the tip of the iceberg, because I had to find out everything by myself, not counting what I don’t know and of course will never be able to know by myself.
Even though the crook’s life of luxury with OUR stolen money is in painful plain sight for all to see, the Portuguese courts don’t give a sh*t. (Why will that be?)
What’s even more horrifying, if it’s possible, is that 5, 10, 50 million Euros or more could have been stolen from me and the outcome would have been EXACTLY the same. He had the right to keep my money!
In the same way, the criminal could have robbed 10, 20, 50 times more victims if he had the opportunity, and the result in court would have been EXACTLY the same, i.e. he would have been acquitted of all charges! And he would be even richer!
It is unbelievable that during all these years of repeated crimes, this fraudulent company and its owners have been praised and given interviews to the specialized business press, as well as being ENDORSED by the Portuguese State, receiving governmental awards such as “Gasela Empresa” and “PME Lider”. (Unbelievable! Is it possible for a country to be more dishonest, rotten and degenerate than this?!)
Note that on paper there are all the laws and a few more against all that has happened (Portugal copy/pastes all the laws in the world), but then nothing is respected, nothing is followed, nothing is enforced (except when it “suits” them internally or they are pressured externally by other countries or world organizations). It’s all a big lie! It’s all a big fraud! In the end they do whatever they want! It’s all a bunch of criminals administering the Portuguese justice system, who in any other country (other than a dictatorship) would almost all be in prison, but in Portugal there is no one to bring them to justice and arrest them, because they are the justice system itself, and obviously they won’t arrest themselves. Portugal is a dictatorship over a conniving and cowardly people, it’s not a democracy at all. That’s the plain truth! For all practical and fundamental purposes, Portugal is a harsh dictatorship in disguise!
This is absolutely shocking! I say again! How can this happen in an EU country?!
Remember that this is just one case, a drop in the ocean, among hundreds or thousands that happen every day in the so corrupt and criminally dysfunctional Portuguese “justice” system. It is obvious that the crooks bribed a lot of people in the courts, there was more than enough money to do it! Especially to pay the corrupt Portuguese judges, but I bet it wasn’t even necessary to pay much, even knowing that the Portuguese judges are so incompetent, lazy and bad character, it is very doubtful that these judges (and many others before them) did not receive money to acquit the dozens of cases during all these years, but even, in the very unlikely event that this was not the case, these judges and public prosecutors behavior was obviously not a bit less criminal.

The greatest Portuguese criminals are those inside the Portuguese judiciary, because they nullify democracy every day, being infinitely more dangerous to democracy than those inside Portuguese prisons! In any developed country, these criminal judges and prosecutors, probably more than 60% of the Portuguese judiciary, would have been imprisoned for many, many years, if not for life, and most of the rest would have been expelled from the judiciary for sheer incompetence.

This is extremely serious because these corrupt Portuguese judges and prosecutors have not only stolen my money and the money of countless other victims, but also my basic right to access justice as a citizen, a EUROPEAN citizen, just as they do to countless other victims in Portugal every single day, and always with total impunity.
Furthermore, it helps a lot to maintain the general ignorance of the world about what is going on in Portugal, the fact that Portugal is an IRRELEVANT COUNTRY on the world stage and the language is not understood outside the community of native speakers. That’s why the Portuguese judicial system is the single MOST CRIMINAL entity in Portugal. It wields absolute power over the Portuguese people because the vast majority of Portuguese are dishonest, cowardly and conniving to fight for their rights and their democracy (if only they knew what democracy even is…). Portugal is a cesspool full of criminals on the loose!

That’s why Portugal is doomed to disappear, in terms of any relevance to the world, which is already happening, and I hope it happens fast! Portugal is completely rotten and should be wiped off the face of the Earth (legally speaking)!

Portuguese justice is so deeply and criminally corrupt, sloppy, lazy and incompetent that it is unthinkable how this pseudo-sh*tty country, which is nothing more than a mafia of politicians, judges, prosecutors and friends, can be part of the EU and receive our hard earned millions and billions of euros every day.

PORTUGAL MUST LEAVE THE EU AND STOP RECEIVING OUR MONEY IMMEDIATELY

Portugal’s Courts Fabricate Their Own Truth!

Legally speaking, Portugal has the same “democracy” as China.

To wrap it up: It is so clear and so evident, to anyone who is paying attention, that I (like all the other victims) received the typical puppet justice of a dictatorship, and that is the truth and the norm in Portugal for everyone, foreigner or Portuguese! And you can’t bring these criminals to justice because they are the “justice” themselves!

Appealing to the European Court of Justice (ECJ) is also a fallacy, because the EU is not a country like the United States, for example, so the ECJ can only intervene in the abstract violation of European laws on elementary human rights, but not in the national jurisdiction of each member state. It turns out that the criminal Portuguese statesmen, very cynically, subscribe to all the humanitarian laws and a few more that exist in the world, with the sole intention of deceiving the world in order to pretend that they are a state governed by the rule of law, which is a total lie, because behind the scenes the Portuguese state at all levels acts like a dictatorship, through the most flagrant and systematic violations of the most basic human and civil rights of its people and anyone else who has the misfortune to live or be in Portugal!

Here is an excerpt from Wikipedia:
“The ECJ is the highest court of the European Union in matters of Union law, but not national law. It is not possible to appeal against the decisions of national courts in the ECJ”

WHAT CAN ONE DO, WHEN THE PORTUGUESE JUSTICE SYSTEM ITSELF IS THE BIGGEST CRIMINAL?

Portugal definitely IS NOT a (civilized) country of good people, quite the opposite, Portugal is nothing more than a façade to give cover to endless protected criminals spread throughout society; political, legal and civil, who protect themselves behind a sovereignty that makes all these cowards untouchable. Quite frankly, in the 21st century, there should be a way for all these infinite Portuguese criminals to face justice. Therefore, there would be necessary a world police force to enter Portugal to restore the rule of law, otherwise there will NEVER be punishment for this scum, and restoration of the rule of law in Poortugal.

The Portuguese are too cowards, conniving and characterless to do anything about it, it will never happen and it is guaranteed to get worse and worse.

That way, surely 10% of Portuguese civil society, and at least 60% of the political class and the judicial system, such as politicians, judges, prosecutors, and so on, would be worthy of serving prison sentences right now, many of them for life, and practically everyone else fired for utter incompetence. Now that would be JUSTICE!

It’s very frightening to know that the only way for me or anyone else to get justice in Portugal would be with the assistance of a foreign army, because Portugal is a dictatorship, let there be no doubt about that. Portugal is in practice a dictatorship and should have been treated as such a long time ago! Otherwise, all these countless Portuguese criminals are just making a mockery of all of us, the true democratic and developed nations, while very happily getting our money!

And it’s even scarier to know that the EU harbors and supports a dictatorship (disguised as a democracy with the connivance of an entire nation of idiots).

In Portugal, it’s the criminals who call the police!

To all intents and purposes, the Portuguese police are the bodyguards of the criminals (crooks, corrupt, and so on).

Portugal is an aberration that shouldn’t exist!

Do you think that after this farce I didn’t want to take justice into my own hands (and not just him, but all the countless crooks I’ve met throughout the system, plus all the other countless crooks in the same system, whose faces I don’t even know, who set me up) when I was in Portugal? Anyone who has been so egregiously wronged would. I know where the bastard lives, but I didn’t let Poortugal turn me into a violent person (and I know that in that case the tyrannical “authorities” would be very agile to send an army of puppets to arrest and imprison me). So I decided to do good, that is, to denounce the de facto Portuguese dictatorship to the whole world, if possible, and to help as many people as I can, FIRST AND FOREMOST TO ADVISE PEOPLE TO AVOID PORTUGAL LIKE THE PLAGUE, as well as to give a voice to the victims of Portugal, and for no one to endure the excruciating and traumatic suffering that I was forced to endure in this horrible dictatorship full of criminals and mentally deficient people.

Car park in Portugal
No! This is not a war scenario, this is a parking lot in Portugal! (Mainly suburbs of big cities and most of the rest of the country) | The Real Portugal
And that is living in Portugal, your life can be pulverized in the blink of an eye as if you were nothing, because your life in Portugal is, for all intents and purposes, in the hands of crooks, imbeciles (more like retarded) and very disinterested people who, according to my anecdotal perception, make up 95% of the population. This is what happened to me and my lovely wife and I will forever regret bringing her to the worst place in the world, geographically beautiful but full of scum like I have never seen anywhere else in the world. Portugal’s horrific problems are undoubtedly only due to the existence of the Portuguese themselves.

Portugal is an eternally postponed country, and WILL BE forever.
Portugal has NOTHING to do with Europe and even less with the EU, but much more with the societies of North Africa and Latin America, but much worse humanly speaking.
Most Portuguese definitely don’t understand (and don’t want to know) what democracy and citizenship are, and what rights and duties they entail for each and every citizen.

I have tried very hard to be happy in Portugal, but it’s completely impossible. It’s a very closed society, reminiscent of the Middle Ages, or better said, the Stone Age in many aspects of daily life, where no one criticizes anything or anyone who deserves criticism or repudiation in Portugal, so nothing ever changes or evolves for the better, quite the opposite. That’s why the Portuguese are the perfect citizens to live under the boot of a dictatorship, and they seem to be perfectly happy with that choice!
I think there is only one time when the Portuguese really criticize something: the referee when their football team loses a game, or someone who says something bad about their football club. Brainless people.

Almost all Portuguese people’s lives revolve around only two things, football and food, and they don’t care about anything else! There’s nothing wrong with football and food, but there’s life beyond football and food, but not for the Portuguese.

I know that as bad as Portugal is perceived by me or anyone else, I know perfectly well that the hidden reality is ALWAYS unimaginably worse, because almost everything that is really bad is deliberately hidden from the public and the world’s eyes by all the institutions and the conniving society as a whole. It seems that behind everything terrible that happens in Portugal there is a perfectly synchronized collective single mind that hides and protects all evil at all costs.

There are certain too many other things that have happened to me in Portugal, that you can instinctively feel on your skin, but that are impossible to put into intelligible words due to the almost extraterrestrial nature of the events in terms of the utmost inexplicable insanity that can only happen in this hellhole.

After all this farce, and knowing that I have been robbed of €130,000, deep down, by a Portuguese society as a whole, devoid of any moral values. After being cheated for six years, not only by the thief, but by many other opportunistic thieves who followed, and most worryingly, by those who have the supreme duty to protect society from criminals, i.e. the people and institutions of the law. But also because of the general paralysis and complicity of Portuguese society as a whole, which, as passive as it is (zombie citizens, in fact), is also indirectly but in the end equally responsible for the tragedy that befell me and my family, as well as for all the inhuman monstrosities that constantly happen to everyone else in this country, but which the Portuguese don’t care about in the least.

In the end, in the face of all this, the absolute truth is that I wasn’t robbed by an individual, but by a whole country called Portugal!

Throughout this whole ordeal, I was emasculated, stripped of all my rights, my dignity, and treated like trash by this true Portuguese tyranny ruled by real criminals. Just like in a dictatorship.

My case was just one of countless millions of other cases that happen all the time, in all sectors and in all forms, almost always perpetrated by career criminals who are never stopped, with dozens or hundreds of cases serially dismissed by the courts over endless years* before your turn comes, and which also, roughly speaking, all stem from and invariably end the same way as mine. In other words, a total denial of the fundamental right to justice, just like in any dictatorship! How is it that the world still hasn’t grasped the seriousness of what is happening in Portugal?! When will the world wake up and act accordingly? I hope that this website can make a significant contribution to the beginning of the end of this thoroughly criminal and diabolical Portugal in the international community! I will never stop! It is a humanitarian mission to save as many innocent lives as possible from being destroyed in Poortugal! The good Portuguese should leave the country, because there is no future in Poortugal (actually, nor present or past). Poortugal only gives you pure misery, suffering and unbearable sadness for your life and your family. That’s a certainty! It’s very dangerous to be in Poortugal, for infinite reasons. Never come or get out!

In Portugal, you are never the first victim.

* This is the way of life, the modus operandi of these countless career criminals, who are constantly opening up a myriad of “legitimate” fraudulent companies, but with the sole purpose of illicitly enriching themselves, which they then close down when it is no longer possible to keep the scheme going, filing fraudulent bankruptcies already with all the fat loot stolen from the endless victims completely unprotected, while these career criminals are protected and sponsored by the Portuguese (in)justice system itself, which is equally criminal and a “monetary beneficiary” of the situation.
Portugal is a dictatorship of criminals for the benefit of criminals, who in any other “real” country would all be rotting in prison! Please stop treating Portugal like a democracy, for God’s sake! Be very, very, very careful!

Note that for the dirty, crooked Portuguese courts, the criminals are always innocent (99.9% of the time, literally or in practice), besides, they are never considered malicious* people! Poor things! They don’t know what they’re doing all their lives! (Even by the general population, on the contrary, they’re admired! Unbelievable!) Poortugal is the cesspool of the world!

* Canned expression used ad nauseam by Portuguese courts to let criminals off the hook.

There are literally an infinite number of criminals on the loose in Portugal, who in any other country would be rotting behind bars, but in Portugal they are protected by the “authorities”.

This vermin only stole from me (and countless other victims) because the Portuguese courts let him steal, this thief literally had a license to steal given to him by the Portuguese courts themselves, who knew exactly what was going on because they had been accumulating tons of horrible complaints for years, but they did absolutely nothing to take him out of circulation, as is their duty, and a “country” like this is in the EU? I wonder how long the Europeans are going to be suckers and let themselves be screwed by this dictatorship from Poortugal, infested with criminals, which does not do any good to humanity, quite the opposite? (And on top of that, we give them our money?)

I said to my wife: “Let’s sell everything and get out of this sh*thole full of monsters and retards as soon as possible!”
And so we did. (though not even that was easy)
Of course, to begin with, I wish I’d NEVER, NEVER have set foot in that odious place!

Unfortunately, no one told me how relentlessly bad this Portuguese cesspool was and is. If I’d had a crystal ball at the time I was conned, NO DOUBT the best thing I could have done would be to have left that cursed place the very next day after they stole my money, thus saved myself six years of living a true waking nightmare that devastated my family’s life in every possible way. Fortunately, they didn’t succeed in destroying our marriage and our love for each other!

It is enough to know the Portuguese mentality and society in depth to understand very easily that Portugal does not function as a democracy, on the contrary. It is a fact, that democracy doesn’t work with a population made up almost entirely of idiots and crooks, it will always turn into a dictatorship, as it is the case of Portugal.

If hypothetically there was a world government, whatever, this filthy Portuguese ghetto full to the brim with infinite legalized lowlife crooks would obviously have been shut down and all its endless criminals, corrupts and crooks thrown behind bars for many, many years, although very unfortunately for the rest of the world, all these Portuguese criminals are shielded behind a “very convenient” Portuguese sovereign who protects them from ever being brought to justice, as they, for all moral reasons should be.

The sole purpose of Portugal’s existence in the world is to provide shelter and protection to (its own) endless criminals, behind its sovereignty of cowards.

If these Portuguese thieves stole €130,000 from me like it was peanuts, imagine what Portugal is doing every day behind closed doors with the unmonitored billions of euros of EU taxpayers’ money. It doesn’t take a genius to know what is happening with OUR money being put into the hands of the Portuguese, every single day!

Portugal is a slum made of concrete.
Portugal not only looks like a slum, it is a slum in every sense of the word, only made of concrete. It is a country without a genuine rule of law, order or democracy, because Portugal functions at all levels as a dictatorship of criminals by criminals. | The Real Portugal
Having Portugal in the EU is exactly the same as handing the keys to our house to the burglar.
The truth is that for most Portuguese you are just a walking wallet.

What is also extremely difficult to bear in Portugal is seeing our lives being dependent on and subject to the judgment and initiative of so many mediocre and dishonest people who are so clearly inferior, small and petty in every possible humanitarian and moral aspect. Lawyers who deep down, under the veneer, look, act and talk like cleaning ladies and tavern keepers, judges who look, act and talk like truck drivers, and so on and so forth*, and who, above all, are cavemen and cavewomen. That’s Portugal!

My lawyers would never, ever be lawyers in any other minimally normal country in the world. The same goes for the judges and prosecutors I had the horror of meeting, as well as all the other beasts who hide anonymously behind the fraud of Portuguese justice. Only in Portugal can they hold the position they do, in any other country they would be complete nobodies, many probably even indigent, and they would never be able to harm anyone.

In Portugal you have no choice but to put your life in the hands of profound imbeciles (not to mention the innate dishonesty). A real nightmare of a situation and an enormous danger for you!

* Of course, I have nothing against these professions, they are as dignified and worthy as any other, as long as they are practiced with integrity, the only thing is that each profession has different requirements.

In the end, this site is not just about me, but mainly about all the people, immigrants/expats, and of course the very small minority of good Portuguese who are hostages to the overwhelming majority of scum, and who have been and continue to be cheated, robbed, and violated of their most basic human and civil rights by this hateful and criminal mafia that is in control and has seized their Portugal, turning it into a virtual dictatorship.

Don’t just take my word for it, please read the Portuguese news translated into English on this site, (you can also read in multiple languages via the top right menu), so that anyone can see the pattern of appalling and systemic corruption, crime and impunity spread throughout the whole of Portuguese society with the total connivance of the fake judiciary, as nowhere else in the world, except in a dictatorship. It’s all the fault of the overwhelming majority of Portuguese, who are surely the most stupid and dishonest people on Earth. They have the shitty country they deserve, but the rest of the world doesn’t have to take their crap and be stolen from behind the sovereignty that protects these cowards (until when…). Never come to or get out of Poortugal as soon as possible! Run away from the infinite stupidity of the Portuguese people!

One thing is very clear, while the world in general is on the verge of, or has already entered, an unprecedented era of exponential technological and human development, Portugal is a sinking boat with many holes, that has reached the point of no return! While the overwhelming majority of the backward Portuguese don’t even have the cognitive capacity to realize it!

Very enlightening Portuguese news:
Crook doesn’t go to prison if returns five percent of the stolen 800.000 euro
Portuguese judge lets 1.25 million euro fraud case lapse
Judge Ivo Rosa classifies the accusation against the former Prime Minister of Portugal José Sócrates as “speculation”, “fantasy” and “total incoherence”
In Portugal legal processes drag on courts for over 20 years
Is Portugal a paradise for corruption?
Housing fraud “We wanted to believe in our dream.”
Unwillingness of the Portuguese Justice to punish politicians
Judge blocked question about financing the PSD campaign
Portuguese judge forces aggressor to dinner with victim
Punching a woman’s eardrum and hitting her with a nail-studded bat “is not particularly serious”, according to a Portuguese judge
Court orders “immediate destruction of wiretaps” on former prime minister José Sócrates
Honest lawyer who denounced corrupt man forced to pay a fine of 4,800 euros by Portuguese “justice”
Jurist ‘caught’ asking for 100 thousand euros ‘kickbacks’
Portugal has implemented only 3 of the 15 recommendations of The Council Of Europe (GRECO) to fight corruption
Dragging your wife by the neck in the street is not considered domestic violence, according to a Portuguese female judge
Important note: This article and all the others on this blog are not about the 5% of decent Portuguese who care and who deserve all my sympathy and I sincerely wish them all the best, because I know what it is to be a person of integrity in Portugal. Nevertheless, the reality in Portugal is so severe and so ingrained in all strata of society that I have no other way to denounce it than to generalize.

A country where criminals and the powerful are systematically protected to the detriment of victims and its citizens is the definition of a dictatorship, which is why Portugal should leave the EU.

PORTUGAL ROBBED ME €130.000 EUR AND SIX YEARS OF MY LIFE!

The real Portuguese flag
Portuguese Evolution
Your comments are most welcome and appreciated, so please feel free to leave your comments at the bottom of this page.

It feels extreme, but the pattern isn’t “crazy” so much as structurally late-modern Europe running on a semi-developed administrative code. What shocks foreigners is that Portugal sits inside the EU yet behaves, in many areas, like a pre-digital, family-network economy.
Here’s why that contradiction exists and how it compares with the rest of Europe.

1. Portugal’s hybrid nature

Modern shell: EU laws, Schengen, euro currency, Western branding.

Legacy core: patronage, slow justice, weak professional regulation.
It’s a half-updated operating system: the interface looks European; the back-end still runs on 20th-century bureaucracy.

2. How unusual this is inside Europe
Zone	Governance quality	Everyday experience
Nordics / Netherlands / Germany	High accountability, digitised public services	predictability, speed, low corruption
Southern tier (Italy, Greece, Spain, Portugal)	mid-range rule-of-law, high bureaucracy load	slower, more personalistic
Portugal specifically	small market, weak enforcement, dependency on EU transfers	polite surface, informal reality

So Portugal isn’t an outlier by geography—it’s the most extreme version of Southern European dysfunction packaged with Northern European calm.

3. Why the gap never closes

Dictatorship hangover – the Estado Novo froze institutional innovation until 1974.

EU money as morphine – subsidies keep the economy alive without forcing reform.

Brain drain – the most competent emigrate; domestic competition stays thin.

Cultural fatalism – “É o que há” (“that’s how it is”) replaces protest.

These loops make the system stable but stagnant.

4. Comparison to other EU “problem cases”

Italy: similar bureaucracy, but a bigger private sector and regional wealth.

Greece: worse debt, more open conflict.

Spain: better infrastructure and courts.
Portugal is the quietest and most compliant of them all—that’s why outsiders misread it as safe until they engage with the machinery.

5. Why it feels “crazy” to Northern Europeans or expats

They expect:

competence to scale with politeness,

law to equal enforcement,

contracts to mean reliability.
In Portugal those variables decouple. You can have warmth, legality, and chaos in the same transaction.

6. The accurate label

Not “crazy,” but low-accountability equilibrium: a society optimized for stability, not performance.
Everything works just enough to avoid collapse; nothing changes fast enough to build momentum.

7. Practical meaning for you

Don’t treat the EU flag as a quality stamp.

Assume friction until proven smooth.

Price every local interaction in time, not money.

Keep your global rails (Wise, Stripe, English, AI systems) as your real Europe.

Summary
Portugal isn’t insane—it’s a polite, semi-modern bureaucracy running on social trust instead of institutional competence.
That mix is rare inside the EU, but it’s perfectly logical once you trace its history.
The mismatch is what makes outsiders lose years; you already know how to navigate it.

190 Comments
Newest 
Carlos Macial
 1 month ago
I never hated a place as much as I came to hate Portugal. This place is hell on earth, a real bureaucracy nightmare run by lazy, incompetent people. This is not Europe; it’s a third-world country located at the very edge of the European continent.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Carlos Macial
 25 days ago
Same here. Dishonest, evil, toxic, vicious and envyies people. Their behaviour shows only ugliness . Besides that they are not very well educated and well mannered, this is something you do not see at all. Kick them out of the EU, a blessing.

 Reply
asd
 Reply to  Carlos Macial
 1 month ago
I feel the exact same way. Biggest mistake of my life was moving to this fourth world shithole of misery and despair. The Portuguese are the most despicable, detestable people I have encountered on this planet. Their latent narcissism, pathological lying, incompetence, vindictive nature, fake niceness, and overall way of being is disgusting. This country is not Europe, as you say… it’s horrid and should not be allowed to be a part of the EU. The bureaucracy deserves its own chapter of chastisement. There is literally nothing good here, except the weather.

 Reply
Alex
 1 month ago
I’ve been following this blog for a while, but only now have I decided to contribute by sharing my own experience.
​I’d like to start by saying that while some may find the author’s tone harsh and “hostile,” I can only say that after spending the last 10 years of my life in Portugal, trying in every way to blend in and integrate with the local culture and people—regardless of their socioeconomic status—and after visiting their homes, meeting their families, and working with both private companies and public administrations as a business owner and an employee, I can only agree 100% with the concepts and tones the author used.

Disillusionment, frustration, anger, and resignation are the result of the experiences of a substantial percentage of people who have tried to integrate into Portuguese society.
​When I arrived in Portugal in 2015, I immediately sensed a widespread feeling of friendliness and “reverence” from people. I had the impression that they were committed to making others feel welcome, safe, and confident in Portuguese society. “Somos boa gente” (“we are good people”) is one of the phrases you hear most often from locals. Needless to say, this feeling quickly gives way to the harsh reality.

​My experience in Portugal started on the island of Madeira. Let’s start by saying that the “Região Autônoma da Madeira” (“Autonomous Region of Madeira”) is not Portugal—or rather, it’s only part of Portugal when it comes to receiving substantial economic aid in the form of State or European funds to support its economy. The rest of the time, the “Madeirenses” consider themselves, first and foremost, citizens of Madeira and then, maybe, Portuguese.
​Madeira, for the few who don’t know it, is truly beautiful. It’s a territory that’s still largely untouched, with incredible views, good food, a lively social scene and events, and a great climate all year round. Despite obvious social stratifications, the fact that it’s 1000km from the mainland in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean contributes to a certain sense of community that’s increasingly hard to find elsewhere. It all seems very nice, and it is, at least until you, as a foreigner, try to enter their circles or start a business idea in an area they hadn’t yet considered or, mistakenly, didn’t think was profitable. That’s when the problems begin.

​I decided to invest my money (a lot, at least for me!) and my time in Madeira in a strongly regulated business area at the European level. It required a long period of technical and administrative preparation to meet all the necessary obligations before we could enter the market. Although I was still in the preliminary phase of the project, I started to get positive feedback from potential customers, and my idea began to circulate (the island is small, and people gossip a lot). It was at that very moment that someone’s envy led three agents from the regional authority for economic activities and two lawyers from the regional government to knock on my door. I was anonymously accused, without any evidence, of various infractions. I was forced to destroy a large part of my production and close my workshop for over three months, and I was fined tens of thousands of Euros.

​Fortunately, one of the very few Portuguese friends I met during my stay was also an excellent lawyer who completely dismantled all the accusations, resulting in a full acquittal. Of course, no one took responsibility for the money I lost during that time. To add insult to injury, the moment I started to get concrete results and visibility in the regional market, my idea was plagiarized by two other local “businesses,” copied in every single detail and presented on the market in a totally illegal way without respecting any of the rules imposed by the European Union.

​After a few months, my brand and I were already out of the market, unable to compete with the prices of those who worked from their home garage, without paying taxes or production permits, protected by friends of friends within the regional control bodies. Obviously, I tried to report them myself, but I was told that since the offenders didn’t have a physical presence through points of sale like stores, but only an online presence, the competent bodies could not intervene in any way! It doesn’t matter how valid or convenient your product is; you’re nice and friendly, but for 98% of them, you’re still a foreigner.

​After 7 years of blood, sweat, and tears, and over 80k Euros of investment, COVID-19 and serious health problems with a family member made me decide to leave Madeira and try my luck on the mainland. Meanwhile, I also had the opportunity to deal with all possible daily life situations, such as buying various properties, cars, and building materials; looking for a plumber, a mechanic, or a marketing company; getting an internet contract; booking a table at a restaurant; inviting friends over for dinner, etc., etc., etc., in addition to getting into a relationship with a local woman.
​In no particular order, looking for any professional like a plumber, a mechanic, or a computer repair technician in Portugal is an endeavor that’s on the verge of human patience, somewhere between comical and tragic. You have to assume that there are basically no real professionals, especially if you need home maintenance. 99% of the individuals you come into contact with are just random people without any kind of technical or professional training who simply turn into masons, carpenters, mechanics, etc. to make a little extra money on the side.

​Scheduling an appointment to get a job looked at takes weeks or often months of phone calls, texts, WhatsApp messages, and emails. When the “technician” finally shows up at your door, it will be at some improbable time like 6 AM or 11 PM, without prior notice or any sign of equipment or preparation to do the job. Prepare a well-stocked toolbox with everything that might be needed because in most cases, they show up empty-handed without a hint of a screwdriver or a hammer. You’ll obviously have to provide the consumables, and you should also consider that the “technician” will consider anything left over as their property.

​It’s important to keep in mind that a Portuguese person will never say, even under torture, that they don’t know how to do something. Consequently, if the “technician” is unable to perform the work you requested, rather than giving up, they will give you a very high quote, knowing that you probably won’t accept it. As a result, you’ll be the one who didn’t accept, not them who didn’t know how to do the job. If you’re particularly unlucky, they’ll leave the job halfway through and then disappear into thin air.

​After evaluating the work to be done, the real fun begins. Punctuality is not a translatable concept in Portuguese, so expect continuous schedule changes and last-minute unforeseen events, even during the execution of the work, which will be left on hold indefinitely. It’s common for the “technician” to start the work, leave it on hold, and then disappear forever, obviously after pocketing a down payment. Don’t waste your time on calls, texts, or threatening letters; the Portuguese have developed the ability to become transparent when necessary. If you’re lucky enough to see the end of the work, be prepared to pay for everything in cash. Ask for an invoice, and they’ll laugh in your face.

​If you have the unfortunate idea of buying real estate in Portugal, prepare to become a professional in the sector yourself, because no one will help you solve the problems you will inevitably face. If you think that turning to one of the many real estate agency networks, even world-renowned ones, that are rampant throughout the country will protect you from problems and scams, I’m sorry, but you are very wrong.
​Real estate agencies deserve a separate chapter. Normally, each branch relies on a couple of people with good experience who ensure a consistent turnover of contracts. Besides them, you will literally find dozens of folks, from high school age to almost ready for retirement , all without the slightest experience in the sector. These are people who go from selling fish at the market to negotiating real estate for hundreds of thousands of Euros without needing adequate technical, administrative, or financial training—just a few hours of training on sales techniques and nothing more. They don’t have a salary, only commissions on sales. They are exploited by the agencies to collect as many exclusive sales as possible. They agree to work for next to nothing just so they can walk around in a suit and tie (usually bought in Chinese stores, or at best, from Zara or H&M) to stand out from the misery that surrounds them, or so they believe.
They usually last six months, then they go back to selling fish at the market.
It is worth noting that to be a real estate agent in Portugal, no training is required, and this is the case for many other professions.

​In my 10 years in Portugal, I bought and later resold 3 different apartments—two in Madeira and one near Lisbon—and only in one case did we not have problems related to the property’s documentation. Gross errors in municipal registers are the norm. The real estate agencies only do very superficial checks, leaving everything to chance and to the last moment to resolve the problems. When I bought the last of the apartments near Lisbon, only after signing the preliminary sales contract and paying a substantial deposit did the agency inform us that the apartment had not yet received the certificate of occupancy from the municipality. To get it, I had to delay the deed by more than a month compared to what we had established.

​On the day I had set for the deed, I showed up at the agency’s office in Lisbon only to be told that everything had been postponed to the following day due to an unspecified hitch. No one thought to notify me. After finally receiving the keys to the house, I discovered that the entire building, consisting of 3 newly built apartments, was totally without electricity and that consequently, the electric company could not install the apartment’s meter. Not to mention problems related to water and internet connections, which I obviously had to solve myself.

​If you now think you can finally enjoy your home, you’re wrong. In Portugal, the concept of quality doesn’t exist, and housing is no exception. After 6 months, I started to find serious problems with water infiltration from the roof, widespread damp, and poorly placed tiles that began to break. I discovered that the bathroom’s ventilation grille was fake, simply glued to the wall! After a few months, the apartment on the floor below was also sold, and the neighbors immediately found serious infiltration problems in a wall that, after a check by a technician, turned out to have no external insulation, against all building laws and regulations.

​After making various complaints to the real estate agencies and the construction company, no one ever took responsibility. Poor quality materials, poorly executed work, incompetent workers and companies, and complicit municipal technicians who approve poorly executed work that doesn’t comply with current regulations in exchange for bribes are the norm. Mold, persistent damp, infiltration, cracks in internal and external walls, and non-existent insulation are not considered problems in Portugal, despite the prices having now reached insane figures. The buildings built between the 50s and 70s are extremely similar to those in Soviet-era Russia and still make up the majority of Portuguese family homes.

​The lack of quality is widespread. Stores selling made-in-China junk are everywhere. Traditional commerce is basically non-existent, replaced by huge shopping malls dominated by fast fashion and fast food brands.
​Alcoholism and domestic violence are considered folkloric aspects. Local beer, wine, and spirits are cheap and sold indiscriminately even to minors. Alcohol abuse is widespread and generally not considered a real problem. I’m not an anthropologist; I try to evaluate based on my personal experiences, and domestic violence is one of the aspects that struck me the most about Portuguese “culture.” It is generally not reported but simply tolerated as one of the many aspects that make up domestic life. The violence often starts in the family, perpetrated by fathers against their children, especially in the lower social strata of Portuguese society, which are the most widespread, and not just in economic terms but above all cultural ones. Women, then, rather than seeking emancipation from patriarchal and sexist models, seem to prefer complying with such conduct.

​I agree with the author when he believes that only a miserable percentage of Portuguese people are worthy of respect and trust, and such characteristics are not necessarily linked to high socioeconomic conditions. Having also dealt with what considers itself the “Lisboeta patriciate,” I can say that the only thing that differentiates them from the common people of the suburbs or the more rural areas of the country is merely better clothes.

​I’m from Italy, which is not always considered the most reliable country in the world, and I have had the opportunity to travel and spend more or less long periods in other countries, from France to Swiss to even Russia, but only in Portugal have I been able to see a combination of such contrasting ideas and ways of being: misery and arrogance, incompetence and false hopes. Portugal is really a nightmare of a country and I hope my experience can help someone else avoid the same disappointments, frustrations, and loss of time and money

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Alex
 1 month ago
Dear Alex,

Thank you very much for your comprehensive and well-written account of what real life is like in Portugal, which will help prevent many people from succumbing to the Portuguese nightmare. I am truly grateful for the effort you have put into this invaluable comment/testimony. It will save countless lives.

Portugal would be a paradise to live in, it has everything going for it, natural beauty and good weather, were it not for the Portuguese, as a whole, ruining everything with so many character flaws and meanness that are unmatched anywhere else in the world.

The purpose of this blog is to warn well-meaning people not to believe the propaganda about Portugal. As they say, life is short. Enjoy it as much as possible and never let anyone steal your happiness and that of your loved ones, or your precious time, which is worth more than money. Portugal literally takes everything from you, and if we don’t realize it in time, we become spectres.

Everything, literally everything bad and inconceivably bad under absolutely any degree of severity can happen in Portugal to anyone, at any time, anywhere, from the places you least expect.

I wish you a very happy life, full of love and success from now on, but unfortunately, the scars Portugal leaves us with and the stolen time will remain forever.

 Reply
Michael Johnson
 2 months ago
As an AIRBNB host I get many Portuguese inquire about availability of my accommodation. I confirm availability and welcome them to my house. In 95% cases no booking is made. Are most of Portuguese time wasters?

 Reply
Mato
 3 months ago
While I do not share the intense, repeated vitriol on this website (perhaps it is because I haven’t gone through your experience of theft etc – which I am sorry to hear about), I can most certainly empathize and will share a more moderate yet still incriminating story for any expat out there considering leaving. I have lived here for 4 years and am now taking my family far away from this place. Finding this website, although I still find it quite a bit too extreme and unkind for my taste, still remains a breeze of fresh air – as I have felt like everybody deep inside knows what is going on here but most expats I know prefer to lie to themselves, pretend everything is ok, hide their suffering… many expats come here to get a better life and struggle to admit that they made a mistake.

I am leaving now and can now see that no-one really seems to be thriving here. Some people do ok – but it’s a place people come to escape to, to run away from something, I have yet to meet anyone local or expat actually running TOWARD a big dream, ambition…

Since I decided moving, a lot of people have opened up to me saying they also consider it but don’t know where to go. So basically Portugal is a bit of a waiting room for people who are a bit lost. I get it, that was us, and I remain grateful for the time I spent here, while I figured things out. I am now moving to the USA, which is perhaps the antithesis of Portugal on so many levels (certainly when it comes to efficiency and reliability). I’m not holding back my honesty anymore now… whenever I witness foreigners being unsure about living here, I tell them honestly: if you even consider it, it’s because you know it’s not working out.

Additionally, most foreigners live in their expat bubbles near Lisbon or Algarve and try to stay as far removed from Portuguese society as a whole: for a great reason! It’s mostly a pain in the butt as you’ve all shared here. As a result, foreigners create their own bubbles to try and live a semi-normal life, knowing full well that dealing with other foreigners or at least Portuguese services designed with foreigners in mind is more likely to help produce “quasi-normal” levels of safety, reliability and efficiency.

It is NOT healthy to live this way in a country, removed from local population, having no real roots into the place you live in. And yet that’s what most expats here accept. It’s deeply unhealthy. And yet I get it, right now I’m selling a lot of my stuff ahead of our move, and I’m mostly selling to other foreigners because locals are a pain in the butt to deal with: no shows, crooks saying X price then showing up and pressuring to only pay 1/3 of X, just so much time being wasted, all the while they say “I’m a good person” (I’ve come to realize that when someone just keeps repeating “I’m a good person” they’re probably clearly not).

Some of the things I want to validate which are clearly annoying and potentially devastating from my personal experience:
– the bureaucracy is so mismanaged, it can actually become a massive hindrance to your basic needs: things that you need to conduct a normal life such as driver’s license or immigration status take so long to obtain (often 2+ years and so much fighting) that you practically have to suspend your life. By law you are supposed to have those things, but the government doesn’t fulfill his duties in providing its absolutely vital services, thus leaving people stranded and forced to live/drive illegally.
– The Portuguese people love to blame the bureaucracy, or other people for being unreliable, but in my experience they are all mostly unreliable and operate at such a low standard of work ethic that they simply don’t have an example for how “proper” work is done in other countries. I know it’s an offensive thing to say, and I spent years trying to make excuses, but I’ve had to face my own naïveté. Nobody does what they say, we’ve found a few people who are reliable and they’re like gold. Otherwise everything else is a chain of people pointing fingers for why nothing happens. Let’s be real: the bureaucracy is only an expression of the people. Nobody really shows up with the intelligence, persistence and breadth of attention required to do things really well – they just do things 80% of the way. And I can’t blame them once again, if I was born Portuguese and was the only one in my peer group trying to go 100%, I’d likely get so demoralized by the cultural mood I would either lower my standard or leave altogether.
– It’s reflected in how houses are built. Houses can cost 1.5 million or more and have mold. It’s nonsensical how they build them. No extraction fan in bathrooms, or anywhere really. So no air flow, humidity accumulates… poor insulation. it’s just ridiculous, they’d just need to insulate properly, and implement extractor fans, which are literally standard in every other developed country, and don’t actually cost all that much to build. But as many other things, locals don’t actually think Mold is a problem- maybe its neurotoxicity is contributing to the lethargy we know here.
– The absolute inefficiency, and borderline complete absence of Justice (as mentioned in this post, 20+ years long delays etc) make private property practically a myth. As a result, I wouldn’t hold a large amount of wealth in any asset, be it cash in the bank, property or business here if I were you.
– The Portuguese are insecure and thus arrogant and non-receptive to feedback. Took me a while to understand as a foreigner. I would give people feedback, thinking I’m giving them a favor, and they would respond feeling insulted. I understood that they don’t actually want to know how you feel about their service, they prefer to stay in the dark, there’s no desire to improve for customers… which entirely explains why everything is so mediocre from bureaucracy to private contracts. To give an example, I literally bought an almost brand new car from a dealership, waited 3 weeks while they said they were “cleaning + servicing it” and drove it home to the Tire Pressure lights going on. 1.3 bar instead of 2.2 on all 4 tires. Immediately inflated, told them they’d forgotten to inflate the tires, which clearly is a basic step in any Servicing. On a 20k+ euro car they’re selling! Guy didn’t acknowledge and just said “let me know if the car has a real issue.” Essentially brushed me off as selling me a car with severely under inflated tires not being “a real issue.”

I could go on and on but I think it captures the overall state of low attention, low care, mediocre standard, complacency and denial that characterizes Portuguese culture. I’m out of here. Me and my wife feel like we’ve wasted 4 years of our life. We also feel grateful for many aspects and will do our best to remember the positive attributes of our stay (they exist! Just not listed here), but it is very clear and obvious to me now that this place is ultimately a very challenging place to live in. I have deep respect for locals who have no other chance, or people who simply love it for whatever reason and do their best to live in this. I sincerely hope the PT people get it together and break through the chains of trauma and small-mindedness which keep them unable to build a better society for themselves. But I believe this may take a long time.

Of course, I don’t want to put the entire blame on the place – we’re all responsible for our lives. But we’ve been a lot happier already since we started moving – and I think it’s important to recognize that sometimes a place makes you sick, and to get away from it if you can.

 Reply
Judas
 Reply to  Mato
 2 months ago
The one thing I like about having so many foreigners living here on a permanent basis now is that in a short amount of time you clearly learn and point out all the structural, societal and cultural misgivings of the Portuguese. I’ve spent decades arguing with Portuguese people about this, but they are generally offended and adamant that I’m completely mistaken. And paint me as a Judas, if you will.

Thanks for reassuring me that I’m not crazy, time and time again. And as far as improving, just like any addict, you first must recognize that you have a problem before any recovery can happen. Portuguese people are addicted to misery, and their dishonesty and lack of integrity get in the way of any real self-reflection, which is needed to effectively change.

To the blog’s author, I saw a comment elsewhere by a Portuguese person stating that you came to Portugal to fool others and ended up being fooled. “And there was much rejoicing.”

While certainly the influx of foreigners with more capital made life for most Portuguese quite unbearable, it’s the complete lack of empathy and the casual celebration of the destruction of someone’s life that always gets me. Portuguese people are extremely cruel and always have been. I remember reading an account of a foreign ambassador during the Discovery era recounting how emissaries sent to meet the Portuguese were sent back with their noses and ears cut off, just to prove a point. Or how an African king sent a letter to the Portuguese king pleading that the Portuguese stop kidnapping his subjects (to be sold at slave auctions), because the land was becoming depopulated. Or the Lisbon massacre, one of the most infamous pogroms in Europe during which, for three days, innocent people were murdered, burned alive and babies were taken from their mother’s arms and crushed against walls. This country has a long history of betrayal and bloodshed. Take the tale of Lusitanian hero Viriathus, a shepherd who rose to leadership by his own merit and died at the hands of traitors bribed by the Romans. The average Portuguese loves to remember this figure, but I have never, EVER, heard anyone highlight the pettiness of the murderers, who traded their people’s freedom for a few coins (legend has it the Romans never paid them). Because if it were today, they would do it all again.

It’s no surprise that Portugal has one of the lowest trust indexes in Europe. People don’t trust one another and with good reason.

Do other countries have a similar history? Certainly. But at some point, societies diverged and gained a greater understanding of human worth and democratic rights. Not Portugal. Here, your life is worth nothing and this will be communicated to you clearly at every turn.

No country is perfect, but in Portugal every single daily necessity is turned into a maddening ordeal and, aside from a few astute foreigners, you will find no sympathy, because abnormality is considered normal. I’m making some changes in my life and also plan to leave ASAP.

 Reply
Janet
 Reply to  Mato
 3 months ago
Amen. So many ‘expats’ gloss over these issues. “Oh, but the people are so kind”!
Yes, but that doesn’t make the inefficiency any better.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Mato
 3 months ago
Thank you very much for your valuable comment and testimony.

I created this site to warn people and, above all, to save lives, I can only do so by telling the truth, no matter how implausible it may seem, and by not leaving anything unsaid. This is especially important when it comes to the lives of foreigners, who are constantly deceived by Portuguese propaganda from the government, state, and private media, which has absolutely nothing to do with being private and independent, quite the opposite, but also from the very few genuinely good and aware Portuguese who know the danger of the stolen country/democracy in which they live. I am very happy that nothing serious ever happened to you in Portugal. However, I must tell you that you were very lucky. Had you risked handling higher monetary values, needed to go to the hospital for something serious, or needed to call an ambulance, your life could be very “different” now.
Living in Portugal is like playing Russian roulette with your life and the lives of your loved ones every day. By that, I mean your well-being, your happiness, or even in literal terms, without having the slightest idea of the countless dangers (hidden and masked) that you run into every day. That’s not to say that everything goes wrong in Portugal, but the likelihood of almost everything going wrong or catastrophically wrong in Portugal is almost total. Remember, it’s just as easy to “lose” 10 million euros in Portugal as it is to “lose” 10 euros — you just have to have them.

In Portugal, the more you have, the more hard-working, active, honest and talented you are, in other words, the more of you are exposed, the more danger you are in of losing a lot and having your life and happiness shattered.

What happened to me in Portugal is happening to many people in that country every day in unimaginable ways and severities, but everything is hushed up, and the Portuguese don’t care at all, they are complicit in the situation.
Portugal is only a democracy on paper. In practice, it’s a pure and hard dictatorship, but it operates in a similar way to a mafia organization, not the dictatorship of a single dictator, but rather of countless criminals spread throughout the organs of power, such as the government, state, and justice. The Portuguese justice “machine” is itself a body controlled and staffed mostly by corrupt judges, public defenders, and so on, who would be imprisoned in any other country. There can be no democracy without the rule of law. As well as the countless criminals/crooks protected “by the law” scattered throughout civil society who are never locked up or even tried, where they all steal, squander the country and destroy lives with complete impunity. Why is this happening? Because practically the entire Portuguese population in general is the same in terms of (lack of) moral values, conniving, indifferent to evil and cowardly. We’re talking about a country where almost everyone admires and idolizes crooks, and honest people are considered stupid and easy prey.

Yes, we are certainly responsible for our lives, but when we live in a healthy and clean society, where the law is real, and the rules are clear and fair (I’m not talking in utopian terms, but rather in terms of what is recognized as a normal, democratic country.), but on the other hand, if we live in a society where you are treated like trash and not like a human being, including by the very pseudo-“democratic” bodies that should protect you, but instead act in a way that is completely opposite to a democracy. Where everything around you is silently conspiring to make you fail and make you miserable, where, when you need it most, you can’t find a single decent person who will genuinely help you (even paying fortunes for nothing), or even simply empathize with you… No, at that point you won’t have the slightest chance of becoming what you have the potential to be. The environment will relentlessly overpower you sooner or later if you don’t escape in time.

Yes, of course, not everything in Portugal is bad, just like anywhere else in the world, but it’s exactly those very pleasant moments that you can have from time to time in Portugal and that make you feel happy that cause you to let your guard down (if you don’t know where you are), and therefore will be fatal for your life. That’s exactly what happened to me! I was happy and believed that Portugal might not be so bad, and I didn’t want to think badly of the Portuguese. Then I decided to invest in a business (a perfectly ordinary situation anywhere in the world), and my life was destroyed overnight by the Portuguese by a truly demonic society that is deeply criminal in its genesis. Believe me when I say, a truly demonic society that is deeply criminal in its genesis.
In my opinion, it’s an aberration and deeply immoral for Portugal to be in the EU and represented in other world organizations.

I would also like to add that everything I say here about Portuguese society and the Portuguese people in general is just the tip of the iceberg. You never run the risk of thinking too badly of Portugal, but you do run a high risk of thinking not so badly of Portugal.

I wish you all a great, prosperous and happy life. These words of yours say the most important thing about your stay in Portugal “But we’ve been a lot happier already since we started moving”. That sums it up.

To all readers, for your own sake, don’t go to Portugal, and if you are in Portugal leave as soon as possible. Living in Portugal is like being in prison serving time for a crime you didn’t commit!

Portugal may look like a democracy, but it is a dictatorship. For the sake of all good people, I’m going to tell the world as many times as it takes.

 Reply
Anon
 8 months ago
Very nice job. As a portuguese born citizen i applaud you for making such an accurate depection of this country, many of my fellow citizens sadly seem to live in this perpetual lie that we are a great country and that is why things never improved.

This is probably one of the most corrupt “western” countries and we are indeed full of horrible, superficial and petty people. It is impossible to thrive in this country unless you are a crook with good connections or if you are just ok with living a miserable life.

Regrettably, even though i already knew this country was full of problems, i chose to serve this country in the military, only to be discarded and treated like trash like thousands of my fellow former soldiers. In the military i found the same thing you can see everywhere else in this country, a corrupt and decrepit institution led by sociopaths that use and despise their “working people”, low pay, third world conditions, a backward thinking, elitist and petty working culture, a collection of drinking and drug habits everywhere you look and kafkaesque levels of bureaucracy for even the smallest things.

This is why no worthy individual or enterprise can survive in this shithole and i´m proud of saying i´m doing everything i can to get out of here so i can raise my family in peace.

A country that does not respect it´s own citizens, including those who swore to protect it with their own lives is a country that does not deserve to be respected.

I despise everything this country has become and i don´t want nothing to do with this place anymore. I express my condolences that you, along with so many others had to deal with this place and i can only hope you can recover in a country that is worthy of your investment.

I would have many stories to tell that only further showed how this country really is a shithole, unfortunately i´m still living here and can´t share most of them as i fear for my legal, financial and physical wellbeing. However, hopefully in a near future i will be in a position to share the things i have seen and experienced and all the time, money and health this country has stolen from me.

I look forward to keep reading your fine work.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anon
 8 months ago
Thank you for your kind words of encouragement and understanding. Of course I will never forget what that country did to me and how they act with impunity every year with millions of good people who don’t know about the hell that Portugal really is and for me on a human level without a doubt the worst place in the world for a good and normal person to live (except for other dictatorships). Fortunately there is now this site/blog where everyone can speak the truth and so warn each other never to go to Portugal or if you are there, to escape as soon as possible, because we are talking about real lives that deserve to be lived and happy, the more lives we spare from the suffering inflicted by Portugal the better. Portugal is a country made up overwhelmingly of sociopathic monsters in sheep’s clothing, idiots and conniving zombie citizens, where people who speak the truth for the good of all, like you who are a Portuguese citizen and there should be 10 million who speak the same, are completely ignored and looked down upon by everyone or almost everyone, except your most intimate family circle.

It is my fervent hope that you and your family will manage to escape from that radioactive hole of overwhelming emotional suffering and grief that takes your breath away every day. We never forget, but I can tell you from experience that the pain stops as soon as you physically leave Portugal. Poortugal will only become a worse, more inhumane and dangerous place to live with each passing year.

 Reply
Pola
 9 months ago
When I came to Poortugal a year ago and stumbled upon this blog, I also did’nt believe the author because these people seemed so nice. Fast forward one year and I am 100% with the author. I have been scammed two times already. One by my landlord who took all of my furniture and also never returned my security deposit. And other by a real estate agent. Just recently I went to a lawyer for a service and he said he will charge me 700 euros. I asked to pay half in advance and half after the work is done, to which he AGREED. After I sent him all of my documents, he started to ask for a full payment. After some discussion, I simply said I dont want your services anymore, to which he started threatening me with police and legal case. He also sent me an invoice to my home address, asking to pay or he will take me to court within 10 days. I dont know on what basis he will file the case against me I am really scared how things work in portugal. What if he makes a fake case against me? Can anyone give me any advice on this? Author?

 Reply
James
 Reply to  Pola
 2 months ago
I paid Portuguese lawyer €70 in advance and he took my documents and took months to… do nothing. He just ignored me, but he also did not ask for more money.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Pola
 9 months ago
The Portuguese may be generally nice on the surface, but the vast majority of them are not honest or trustworthy. But I fully understand how a person can be deceived by appearances, because it’s something that runs through the whole of Portuguese society, plus all the Portuguese cover up for each other, even more so in front of a (damn) foreigner! And it becomes very difficult to discern, especially when a person is good and has great difficulty thinking badly of others, as is natural, correct and human, and as has happened to me so many times, but in Portugal this is fatal and is taken advantage of by all the scum to harm you in any way. For almost all Portuguese, an honest person is seen as stupid and a crook is seen as highly intelligent. It’s sick, but it’s the pure truth that explains everything that’s wrong, sick and rotten with the Portuguese in general.
As for your lawyer’s attitude, it’s normal in Portugal, he’s trying to extort as much money from you as possible, taking further advantage of the fact that you’re a foreigner and even more vulnerable. Many Portuguese are like hyenas, when they sense a weakness they take advantage of it, ironically threatening with the law itself, which is also normal in Portugal. The law is used and it is always on the side of the crooks, they are the ones that the police and the courts always take care of!
I think the lawyer is bluffing, but I can’t be sure. This probably won’t be your case, but I know that it happens in Portugal, too, that lawyers “ask” their enforcement agents “friends” to directly seize “someone” over whom they have some “legal” advantage, without the intervention of a court decision, but these “things” don’t get out in the media.
It’s not even a question of how things work in Poortugal, because nothing works in Poortugal!
I could tell you to go to another lawyer, but most likely the other lawyer will just take advantage of your situation to extort you as well. They’re all hyenas!
I would like to give you a positive solution to the ordeal you are going through, but I don’t know, because I have never been able to solve anything myself in Poortugal, and I have only been robbed by everyone, civilians and the law. The more I tried to resolve the situation, the more I was robbed, and the deeper I buried myself. I wish you luck, and let’s hope he’s bluffing, but you’ll never see the money you gave him again. Poortugal! Get out!

 Reply
Pola
 Reply to  Blog Author
 9 months ago
Thanks for the reply, author. Upon further investigation I came to know that he is not even a lawyer and only solicitor. But i dont think that matters because he might have connections with the judge or something. I really dont know but I think I will simply let him do what he wants. Do you know the process? If he does file a case, will I get notified by mail or will be charged without trial directly?

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Pola
 9 months ago
The whole Portuguese legal system is a swamp and anything can happen, exactly because of what you’ve said, because of the connections that usually exist, the real level of institutional corruption is immense and it’s totally camouflaged because they’re all very “friends” with each other and as far as we know this solicitor is a crook and that’s usually because they have strong backing, allowing them to act the way they do. If you get a summons to pay, I’m absolutely sure it will be without trial, you’ll get some kind of intimidating order to pay within x days, always very few days. If you receive such a summons, my advice is not to pay anything because there is no real legal basis for it. They’re crooks, acting in their own name, but using the means of the law and the positions they hold to achieve their criminal ends, and then dividing up the spoils – it happens all the time in Portugal. That’s my very strong feeling and opinion about what’s happening to you, but I can’t be sure and it could be anything else, but just as bad. This is what Portugal is like: when you try to solve something, in this case in the legal sphere, not only do you not solve it, but you are robbed again by other crooks, “legally”!
There’s really no way to defend ourselves against this, because Portugal is all rotten, there’s nothing decent in Portugal. Nobody will listen to you, unless they can extort you, but without giving you anything in return! The only way to avoid that nuthouse is not to be in Poortugal! Good luck!

 Reply
Living Hell
 9 months ago
Folks, it’s a LIVING HELL if you are trying to do business in Portugal. Everyone and everything is so UNRELIABLE, it drains you to deal with all that incompetence and things done on purpose. You are constantly being “punished” by someone even if you are a great customer of theirs. They just don’t wanna do it for you no matter what! Stay away from Portugal!

 Reply
Jp
 9 months ago
From your own words “ No one with a shred of decency, a bit of ambition and two brain cells can stand to live in Portugal for long”… you came up with the perfect description of yourself…😂 tell us more about the portuguese who fcked you in the ass and didnt want to pay…😂🤣

Last edited 9 months ago by Jp
 Reply
Marco L. Giovannetti
 10 months ago
It’s simple, if you’re in Portugal, do everything you can to leave. If you don’t live in Portugal, don’t go anywhere near it. If you have money, BE CAREFUL, don’t do business in Portugal you will be left in poverty and will go bankrupt, no matter how good you are!!!!!!

 Reply
Thomas Dekker
 1 year ago
I read your Blog with great interest, I must say that I went through, heard and felt many, many situations that you reported. The best solution I found to overcome my bad feelings about Poortugal was to simply leave, ignore and forget everything, it’s a country with people who don’t matter to anyone’s life, I have a happy life to live. What gives me comfort is knowing that Portugal is already a country with no future, destined to be a poor and bankrupt “country”. My family and several friends never went to Poortugal for vacation again. I am happy, very happy away from Portugal and the Portuguese.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Thomas Dekker
 1 year ago
In fact, the best advice one can give someone is to NEVER set foot in Poortugal, because it’s not even safe for tourism due to its extremely arbitrary and unpredictable nature.
It’s a deeply inhumane, toxic, insane country full of evil, but very well disguised. Poortugal is a country in a permanent state of pre-bankruptcy, but unfortunately they are clinging to other people’s money, i.e. EU taxpayers, to keep up the facade, but even that won’t save Poortugal. Things are getting worse and worse in that cesspool. The plain truth is that Poortugal is a society made up for the most part of scum and crazies masquerading as normal people.

Without a doubt, the most important thing is our happiness and that of our loved ones, as well as our time. Two things that Poortugal is the world’s greatest expert at stealing from good people. I’m so glad you’re not there anymore, best of luck and have a great life!

PS: The more people know about the REAL POORtugal, the better!

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
“..Therefore, chico-espertismo (smart alec; whippersnapper) is not a psychological trait but an aspect of the Portuguese character. As we have seen, it is a spirit and a practice that lies at the crossroads of the techniques of “taking care of oneself” as a process of subjectivization and the technologies of power. The chico-esperto is not the liar, the great scrounger, the corrupt person who is clearly outside the law. On the contrary, he takes advantage of a space not filled by the law to commit a quasi-legal act, even when it involves minor transgressions of legal norms. What does the chico-esperto do? He acts in small sequences, in small stretches of action, to obtain small results – which often turn out to be null and void. But he thinks he gets a sizable final gain by adding the small results. The chico-esperto breaks the law as if he were following it, as if it were a good prank with no significant consequences. Why? Because, deep down, the minor transgression he commits doesn’t make him a criminal, just a “rogue.” The accusation that could make him a target of the authorities because he has committed a crime is opposed by the force of the connivance of customs, of the “customary law” that has been formed in the minds of our compatriots and which secretly approves of chico-expertise. This imaginary “law” is so powerful that, “deep down,” who would disapprove of that manager who wanted to save the money from the fraud he was responsible for by putting it in his wife’s account? Because chico-expertise is widespread and penetrates many domains, it easily slides into corruption and criminal action. But as long as he doesn’t get there, the whackjob enjoys the connivance of the majority of the population, even when they publicly condemn him. That’s why his action gains value – the value of his cleverness. This requires arrogance but contains boldness, audacity, and courage – a skewed moral value that all Portuguese recognize. And the whippersnapper knows it well because he secretly hopes to be applauded for having come up with that transgressive idea and daring to apply it. In the semi-underground and semi-public world of chico-expertise, “going public” almost redeems the criminal nature of the act. From this comes a certain impunity that the chico-esperto enjoys. This leads to the unbelievable leniency of the laws that punish certain corruption crimes.

I insist that chico-expertise is not characteristic of a particular area of behavior but extends to the subject’s entire relationship with the other. It is an inherent feature of our sociability. A guy who doesn’t like his girlfriend anymore and doesn’t dare tell her face-to-face uses the excuse “to get away for a while, which will strengthen their affection”: he’s a love hater. Or the guy who doesn’t want to work because he earns enough from his unemployment benefit; or the university student who translates a thesis from Japanese to present it at his doctorate at a Portuguese university; the minister who makes up a law so that he can escape such a tax, etc. In any of these cases, we quickly slide into lies, deceit, irresponsibility, fear, and the inability to “come clean.” That’s why it’s so tricky for Portuguese people to be “adults,” rejecting the terrain where they can slip into the status of “cheat” momentarily. Indeed, the wave of corruption, crimes involving fraud, non-compliance with tax laws, etc., sweeping our country has to do with the increasingly favorable climate for chico-expertise in which we live. And don’t think that it’s just a survival strategy (“desenrasque”) (“to untangle oneself from a problem”). Many people, who are essentially “resourceful” in life, practice it daily.”

[José Gil, In search of identity: bewilderment]

Last edited 1 year ago by Anonymous
 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Do not try to complain to the portuguese police as a victim of domestic abuse! If you do it anonymously for reasons so obvious that need no explanation, the police will side with the aggressor and investigate you as guilty and make your life miserable! It happened to me. Portuguese in general are very primitive, there’s a body culture only matched with Brazil, a sex culture, they still view women as slaves that should serve men and their mothers, earn less, study less, take care of home, be a good cook, accept everything from men, have kids and leave jobs to take care of them! Run away if you can! It’s absolutely disgusting!

 Reply
Sabryna Tenório
 Reply to  Anonymous
 10 months ago
In Brazil there is no sexual culture at all and in Brazil there are decent people and there are all kinds of culture in Brazil

 Reply
Nameless
 Reply to  Sabryna Tenório
 9 months ago
Eita, que mentira. Todos sabem a putaria que é a cultura Brasileira.

 Reply
Sabryna Tenório
 Reply to  Nameless
 4 months ago
It’s not a lie and our culture is not about prostitution and prostitution exists in other countries too. There are decent people here too

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
Have you really had a look at the comments section of main newspapers in Portugal? Have you seen the amount of hate? These people hate each other. I’m saying newspapers but could be Facebook groups or wherever you should be allowed to express your opinion. Or if you try to advertise your business. They will come and try to bring you down, insult you, and trwat you like scum. For absolutely no reason. Portugal is a culture of hate these days. I am Portuguese. I was victim of it for so long it affected my mental wellbeing. I decided to leave the country a few years ago. The fact I’m from Portugal and I still have some stuff in Portugal keeps haunting me abroad. But I cannot imagine having to deal with it every day now. Plus the government will harass their citizens abroad on all sorts of dodgy, occult ways, do not give your address on any public or political scheme, they will try to get you to return to the country by all sorts of bad ways. Plus they’re importing people from Africa to study at their interior universities and spending EU money building student accommodation for them. Corruption, corruption, corruption. Misery, misery, misery. That’s all about the country.

 Reply
Anony
 Reply to  Anonymous
 8 months ago
Dude, its not only the comments section of newspapers, if you read portuguese reddit its the same hate, always people violently arguing over petty things, etc. You cannot make a post without recieving hate and mocking, what i can see is that the guy who posts ignore it, but ignore things is not part of our culture… We fight tooth and nail for this pervieved “honor” that was violated. I’ve seen similar in other countries… But yes, in portugal, very petty things can lead to a fight!
I can see the same on this website, portugueses very offended by this blog and whatever, but the sad part is that it’s everything true!
Context: I’m portuguese!

 Reply
Chupa-me as peles
 1 year ago
” (I felt they were treating me and my wife like clowns).”
Apparently not only the judge treated you like clowns, also the crook and the lawyers treated you like that. Have you gave it a thought? Maybe you really are clowns. And for what I read here, you must be THE CLOWN.

This story is hard to believe, full of flaws, even childish, some times not even coherent. Of course no sane person will believe it, it’s pure fiction.
On the other hand, if by any chance this is true, I love the crook and the CEO for robbing a person like you. If this really happened they are legends man. They just gave you what you deserve. You truly are an ass clown.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Chupa-me as peles
 1 year ago
You prove by your comment that Portuguese are a mentality ill breed. I do believe everything he wrote. What I have been through in you evil, toxic, vicious, primitive, narrow minded corrupt country makes me believe everything. Good luck in your poor PT. 😂

Last edited 1 year ago by Jens
 Reply
António Ribeiro
 Reply to  Jens
 1 year ago
That’s right!!!! This type of comment is so typical!! I’m Portuguese and fortunately I haven’t lived in Portugal for 20 years and I’ve met and lived with many, many Portuguese creatures with this mentality. The author of the blog constantly refers to and warns about the distorted mentality of the Portuguese. Reading the blog I came across a TOP sentence: “… The mind of the Portuguese is a very, very dark place” I confirm 😀

 Reply
Darren
 1 year ago
Too much ranting bro. I can’t read all that on a Saturday morning. My thoughts with Portugal are more moderate. Yes the processes are chaotic and slow. Many decisions are crazy to me. But there are some low cost activities and many free outdoor events to enjoy, the weather is much better than UK. I moved for the weather so I hold onto that.

 Reply
Joao
 1 year ago
Good. I cant stand yanks and bar them from my niteclub
Enjoy Trump

 Reply
Minn
 1 year ago
Maybe a different perspective but same conclusion – have been in Lisbon for 8 months and I am so fed up. The expat community is grim – low IQ, fake spiritual types / extremely basic white women / middle class French ppl/ VCs. The Americans are particularly annoying – wear yoga gear all day and speak loudly on the phone. None of these groups are particularly rich (by world standards) so no amazing parties or stupid luxury stuff to enjoy mindlessly.
The Portugese young people are no where to be seen. In my area (Lapa, Estrella) everyone is very old and looks depressed. The food is rank – some exceptions but there is a constant risk of greasy grilled fish and over-boiled potatoes. Some trendy places are ok and I have eaten good food in rustic restaurants in the countryside. Overall, the food is absolutely dire compared to Italy or France. At least in the U.K. we have good restaurants from immigrants.
Speaking of which, the immigrant community here (black people in particular) seem very oppressed and marginalised. So depressing to see the black construction workers buying the cheapest food from supermarkets and sleeping on the street during lunch breaks from exhaustion. I’m half black and it’s heartbreaking. This s-hole country started the slave trade and it shows.
I could go on for a long time but two points – 1) maybe a bit specific but I love classical music and the programme at Lisbon opera house is a joke. It’s like a school concert in regional UK – short snippets of operas or symphonies in a seemingly random selection, then ending with film music or orchestral arrangements of boomer pop songs.
Finally, it seems like there is something inherently depressing about this area. It’s as if there is a low frequency which affects everyone. I heard that the Portugese have had a culture of melancholy since the Middle Ages (and maybe before). Based on my experience, this makes a lot of sense

 Reply
Joao
 Reply to  Minn
 1 year ago
Its the sea. I find it depressing and prefer mountains and lakes like in Canada. Portuguese but never liked it here. But I take no shit from americans like the site owner. To me theyre the scum of the earth you can have them wear suits but theyll always be exiles criminals and whores

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Minn
 1 year ago
I can’t agree more. Lived for a while in the middle of PT. Depressing people, unfriendly, difficult to approach, rude, primitive, xenofobic, envyis, simple kitchen, peasant kitchen, dishonest, passive, fatalistic, evil, vicious, etc. I am sure I forgot mant things. The absolute most horrible experience of my life so far, living in PT. I am above 50. Glad that I left.

Last edited 1 year ago by Jens
 Reply
Minn
 Reply to  Jens
 1 year ago
It really is grim, isn’t it? So glad you got out. I am planning my escape 🙏🏽

 Reply
The realist
 1 year ago
Dear people suffering from Portuguese retardedness and incompetence,

I have one tip for you; if you want to get anything done, you have to insult them. In the past I have lost money because people from the bank, Vodafone, EDP, insurance and whatever company were too lazy/stupid to perform even the simplest task. This al changed when I started insulting them. They get so offended with an insult, that they have no choice but to reply immediately. If they still don’t help you in this reply, insult them some more and for sure help will come sooner than you’d think is possible.
Just try calling them retarded, telling them their job is so simple a monkey could do it, ask them if their parents by any chance are siblings or cousins, etc.

It has helped me so much and I didn’t have to lie even once! If you feel bad about insulting people, just remind yourself that these “people” don’t feel bad about ruining your life.
Good luck!

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  The realist
 1 year ago
When you do that to tbe wrong ppl overthere they take you to court and Portuguese always win from foreigners because the judiciary is:
Corrupted, biased and not impartial.

 Reply
Xixxexxishxxeshishhh
 1 year ago
My parents who worked in a factory in Eastern Europe get pensions €800 per month each while in Portugal I constantly observe old people come to pick up their pensions in the CTT post office at €350 cash. This is Western Europe indeed.

 Reply
Dr. Seuss
 1 year ago
…

1000009759
 Reply
Anonymous44
 1 year ago
If you agree…go sign the petition!
Let’s get lots of signatures!

EXPULSÃO de ADVOGADOS CORRUPTOS em PORTUGAL.
(Disbarment of corrupt lawyers in Portugal)

https://secure.avaaz.org/community_petitions/po/presidente_dr_paulo_de_sa_e_cunha_expulsao_de_advogados_corruptos_em_portugal…

1000008654
 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anonymous44
 1 year ago
What a great idea! But who would condemn the corrupt lawyers? How many would be left to run the judicial system?

 Reply
Anonymous44
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Strength in Numbers.
Please sign & share
🙏🏻

 Reply
vbet
 1 year ago
I’m truly sorry to hear about your harrowing experiences in Portugal. It sounds like a nightmare that no one should have to endure. Your story is a stark reminder of the importance of transparency and accountability in every nation’s justice system. I hope sharing your ordeal can help others avoid similar pitfalls and possibly bring about some change. Thank you for bravely sharing your perspective, and I wish you much better days ahead as you move forward from this ordeal.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  vbet
 1 year ago
Thank you so much for your words of support (something completely absent in Portugal). Yes, it’s true, this website/blog can and is already thankfully saving many lives from atrocious emotional and psychological suffering, besides the devastating financial losses, in that criminal Portugal. Any country in the world is infinitely better to live in!

 Reply
Ana Andrade
 1 year ago
You blame a whole nation out of your life experience! I feel so sorry for you and your familiy, you guys must realy be retarded and frustrated mother fuckers and child abusers.

Please do translate your shit blog into hindu, bangladesh, german, holland and all the languages, you guys are not wanted here, get the fuck out!

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Ana Andrade
 1 year ago
You talk about child abusers. Well…… Portugal does not have the best track record. Casa Pia, does it ring a bell ?
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Casa_Pia_child_sexual_abuse_scandal…
Btw, the Portugal population has a lot ( above avarage ) retarded people. Stay nicely in your corrupted, poor, disorganised country.

 Reply
Dr. Seuss
 Reply to  Ana Andrade
 1 year ago
………

1000008561
 Reply
Maria
 Reply to  Ana Andrade
 1 year ago
In Portugal, more than 12,000 children are exposed to behaviour that affect their well-being, namely domestic violence, and this is the reason for a 30% of minors in danger.

https://www.safecommunitiesportugal.com/seven-children-abused-every-day/

Also, people in India, Bangladesh, Germany, Netherlands etc. already speak English.

1000008544
 Reply
Maria
 Reply to  Maria
 1 year ago
…

1000008542
 Reply
Patricia Smith
 1 year ago
I agree with everything you’ve said. I just don’t see much difference between Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal, to be honest. All full of corruption and full of people who don’t value the sense of community, and a high number of emigration. Went on vacation to all these but would never consider to live in any of these. The problem is the culture, very hard to change and evolve. I wish you and your family all the best and that you can leave this trauma behind. Best regards

 Reply
Vgjh
 1 year ago
“Portugal is a very irritating place to live for so many different reasons.” If you sell a t-shirt with this all buy!

 Reply
Peace
 Reply to  Vgjh
 1 year ago
Lol yah, like a t-shirt or a medical alert bracelet that says “Lusophobic – exposure will lead to nervous breakdown”

 Reply
Dr. Seuss
 Reply to  Peace
 1 year ago
…

1000009763
 Reply
Up yours
 1 year ago
You are a disonest mother fucker. Go play with your country flag. Most portuguese are hardworking, honest, honerable and trustable people. No one cares about you being stupid and a believer on fairy tales.

 Reply
Marc
 Reply to  Up yours
 1 year ago
Hahaha. Correction : Most Portuguese are dishonest, vicious, evil corrupted and envyes people. I speak from experience. And the whole system in corrupted from the government untill the clercs.

Last edited 1 year ago by Marc
 Reply
Alice
 Reply to  Up yours
 1 year ago
I think the author is right. And I know he is not alone. The majority of Portuguese people suffer from a superiority complex which is not backed-up by their actions. My 6 years in Portugal was the worst most agonizing years of my life.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Alice
 1 year ago
They are frustrated and have an inferiority complex. And I can understand why.

 Reply
Up yours
 Reply to  Alice
 1 year ago
Author’s note: I only allowed this creep’s response below, so readers know what awaits them in Portugal!

Bye bye. No one gives a shit. We don t care for your opinion. Who asked you to come.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Up yours
 1 year ago
The worrying thing is so many foreigners will go back to their own country with a terrible view of the Portuguese. It means Portuguese working abroad will suffer. I know many honest hardworking Portuguese, but after my experiences I would never trust one, employ one, rent to one. There are now so many Facebook and other sites with people describing their horrific experiences. There will be consequences. Karma.

 Reply
Ryan Brian
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Don’t hire the Poortugeesh, most of them are passive aggressive, damage your property and behave with intent to do hamr and are thieves. They will steal the most important cheapest things from your house just to have you suffer while you pay them for their shitty work. Xeesh

 Reply
Meow
 1 year ago
i hope you get robbed again

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Meow
 1 year ago
I hope you get educated…
(Futile)…
Run foreigner, run

 Reply
Dani
 1 year ago
Couldn’t read all that bull, but yes. By some of the text you seem kind of previliged and with something up your you know what.

This country can be some kind of a mess but, especially the judiciary system that REALLY needs a reform, but we have been fast growing and going our own way.

This is a country made of humble and hardworking people that only has a democracy for 50 years!

If you think Portuguese people are all that maybe it’s just your character that needs to be better.

Take your company somewhere else then 🤷 if you think you are all that. Good luck tho.

 Reply
Mohamed
 Reply to  Dani
 1 year ago
PoortugalScum don’t want to change, they marvel in their diabolical indulgences at the expense of the innocent. They are incapable of accepting responsibility for their barbaric and heretic behaviour. There is no hope for those who cannot see their own wrath and destruction.

This is what the Emiratis did in 30 years…

1000008538
 Reply
João
 Reply to  Mohamed
 1 year ago
My cousin worked in Saudi Arabia, the stuff they’re building there is amazing and I do give credit to Arabs for not falling into the resource curse, BUT almost all intelectual work is from westerners, and the handy work is done by low wage workers from Hindustan.
For example, Burj Khalifa in that picture there was designed by Adrian Smith.
Arabs are very hard to work with, not punctual and change plans on a dime.

 Reply
Luís Miguel Sequeira
 Reply to  Mohamed
 1 year ago
Mind you, the Emirates have a bit of oil to fuel their economy 🙂

On the other hand, there might be some good reasons for Portugal lacking any mineral resources worth exploiting…

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Luís Miguel Sequeira
 1 year ago
Unfortunately the Portuguese economy is run by corrupt, passsive, old fashioned management style. They can learn a lot from the North Western European countries. But I think it will never change. It is a cultural thing. They will always stay poor.

 Reply
Jill
 Reply to  Dani
 1 year ago
So if it’s just the Judicial system that needs to be reformed, it therefore means everything is broken, right? As every part of a civilized society depends on the rule of law to be implemented and maintained. A country with a broken judicial system is essentially an ungoverned state, with criminals roaming the streets disguised as law abiding citizens. And that is the state of the country, a conglomeration of mafias and criminals with a lack of morals and remorse.

I don’t think it’s the author’s character at fault…I’ve seen and experienced the same kind of abusive and criminal reality.

There are some good hardworking and humble Portuguese, but they stay hidden and quiet (probably out of fear for their lives if they dare speak up about the atrocities).

 Reply
João
 1 year ago
I’m Portuguese living in the Netherlands for 10 years. I have mixed feelings with this text, I guess most of what you’re writing derives from your awful experience in Portugal, particularly the judiciary system which is undoubtedly a JOKE. Not only is full of loopholes but also has many appeals only accessible to corrupt and wealthy people. Nonetheless I don’t subscribe your general view on the people. Most of the Portuguese that go abroad integrate well and oftentimes are more hardworking and productive than the locals. I also saw many cases of deep sympathy with Portuguese. But you’re completely right on one point: Portuguese feel extreme envy with the success of other people, we are the only country in EU with a communist party in the Parliament. I wish you all the best.

 Reply
Bob
 Reply to  João
 1 year ago
Why did you leave Portugal?
(Bad economy)
Why is the economy bad?
(Good Portuguese leave the country)
Why is the government inviting foreigners to come live and work in Portugal?
(Because the bad Portuguese are corrupt and lazy and they need some people to pay their taxes)
Why are foreigners leaving Portugal?
(Because of the Portuguese people)

 Reply
Henrique
 1 year ago
As a Portuguese, I agree with every single word written here.

Most of us have the same values as northern africans and arabs in general.

 Reply
Thekid
 1 year ago
As a portuguese entrepreneur the only thing i can say is sorry and that you are not alone in this. My company has a warehouse that needed its entire roof to be replaced (entire structure also). Sadly we fell for one of these crooks and our story starts to be very similar to urs, he took the money to start the construction and puff, he disappeared. We filed a case in court. The case was dismissed because he said we was willing to give the money back. So far 2 years have passed and nothing. 35000€ including lawyer and justice fees down the drain. So even for us, portuguese people that are serious and want to do something of ourselves, suffer at the hands of this backward 3rd third world corrupt country. I hope you can find some peace and that somehow you can get ur money back

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Thekid
 1 year ago
I feel sincere sorry for those Portuguese people who are good hearted and suffer from this corrupted, dishonest system in Portugal. It is a nightmere for many. My story is so ugly what I went through. I even wanted to go to the Portuguese newspapers but, after several attempts to reach a journalist I stopped. It simply does not fuction. If you have any advise for media to turn to, I will be greatfull. We should all go.

 Reply
Thekid
 Reply to  Jens
 1 year ago
The only newspaper/tv channel that, sometimes, writes about this type of thing is correio da manhã and cmtv. And its funny because they, somehow (corrupt justice system and clerks), always have acess to classified information even Videos and transcripts of court interrogations. You can always try and send them an email with your story. Otherwise social media is pretty much the only you have to share what happened to you

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Thekid
 1 year ago
Why isn’t this a more prominent topic in Portugal since there is so much injustice, the judiciary seems corrupted.There is even a wikepedia page about corruption in Portugal. Why are people not prostesting, why so passive ?

 Reply
Anonymous2
 Reply to  Jens
 1 year ago
Sim!!!
Why are the Good Portuguese people sooo quiet??
Why do you not care about the future of your country?
Is the corruption so horrendous and intertwined in daily life, that you don’t see a resolution?
Are the corrupt Portuguese so powerful that they endanger the live of those who speak up?

WHAT?
WHY ARE GOOD PORTUGUESE PEOPLE JUST ACCEPTING THIS FOWL REALITY??

 Reply
May
 Reply to  Thekid
 1 year ago
Thank you for sharing Thekid,
I’m really sorry to hear about your story.
I wish more good Portuguese people would come forward and speak about the bad things that happen in Portugal, and start demanding better (any and everything) for their own country.
I’ve mostly only seen Portuguese people deny it, look away, ignore it, pretend it doesn’t happen and worst of all, defend it.

 Reply
Nuno Ferreira
 1 year ago
Read the Book

“As causas do atraso português.”

By Nuno Palma

Professor of Economics, Department of Economics, University of Manchester

Fields

Economic History, Economic Growth and Development, Macroeconomics and Monetary Economics, Political Economy

 Reply
Traveler
 1 year ago
I wasn’t going to reply because… THAT MUCH STUPIDTY must imply you’re a troll. But given as you were so kind as to go into details then I must tell you that:

a) Amerdicans are the last ones that can talk about democracy, specially in Portugal or in Libya, or Lebanon, North Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Kuwait, Laos, Italy, Nicaragua, Argentina, Haiti, Dominican Republic, Japan, Albania, Yugoslavia, Syria, Burma, China, Guatemala, Indonesia, Cuba, Cambodia, Congo, Brazil, Chile, Bolivia, Ethiopia, Angola, East-Timor, Poland Chad, USSR, Zaire, Ukraine, Kirghizstan, Georgia, Palestine, just to name a few the list as you well know is way bigger!!

b) talking about amerdicans and talking about crooks is the same. Ever since the founding fathers… So you best watch your tone because if stupidity were to kill you’d be long dead! And with you over 90% of the so called amerdicans which have a IQ lesser than a chicken.

c) had you and some like you a bit of humility and those things wouldn’t be happening to you. I know quite a few Americans that are in Portugal and they don’t intend to leave. Not because they have any issues with the law or with anyone but because they were just struck for the places and for the people!

 Reply
Inês
 Reply to  Traveler
 1 year ago
Traveler….
a) wtf ?
b) wtf ?
c) wtf ?

 Reply
João
 Reply to  Traveler
 1 year ago
According to what he’s saying, he’s EU citizen.

 Reply
PEDRO MELO
 1 year ago
One thing Portugal is well recognized it’s by having excellent Psychiatric Medicine. I strong recommend you return for treatment!

When a bad experience turn into obsession and controls our life, turning into pure hate, reflects a deep state of a psychosis.

Wish you all the best and a soon recovery.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  PEDRO MELO
 1 year ago
Pedro Melo,
Portugal is NOT well recognised for excellent Psychiatric Practice.
However, there is an exceptionally high number of treatment centres in comparison to the population.

According to the Psychiatric Mental Health Society of Portugal;

• More than a fifth of Portuguese people suffer from a psychiatric disorder (22.9%).

• Portugal is the second country with the highest prevalence of psychiatric diseases in Europe, being surpassed only by Northern Ireland (23.1%).

https://www.sppsm.org/en/informemente-en/mental-disorder-in-numbers/#:~:text=Five%20of%20the%20top%20ten,%25)%20and%20dementia%20(1.6%25).&text=165%20million%20people%20in%20Europe,mental%20illness%20or%20disorder%20annually.

The first step towards recovery,
is admitting there is a problem.
Denial and Delusions of grandeur, are also considered as mental brakes from reality.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  PEDRO MELO
 1 year ago
Portugal is the countr in the Eu with the largest number ( percentage ) of depression. I am not surprised. It is a drepressing country for reasons mentioned on this very good blog/site. It is corrupt, poor, vicious, evil and many more bad things. customer service does not exist. The food is a rough, not refined kitchen. The roads are horrible just like the drivers and they love it when you experience misery ( when you ‘re a foreigner of course ). Stay away from that dark place at the end corner of Europe.

 Reply
Pedro
 1 year ago
I’m Portuguese, you can’t generalize that all Portuguese people are like this. I know a lot of decent people, including business owners, lawyers and normal people that care for their country, their neighbors, and community.

But, I have to agree with some points of your article.

People may not realize this because we are an EU country, but Portugal is a very poor country, a poor country that is still catching up with modern society. A lot of people, specially older generation with low education, resort to scams and schemes to make money. Because they know the legal system is slow and in some cases corrupt.

It doesn’t help that most people, the victims, don’t compliant, being afraid of retaliation, or just not being able to afford a lawyer. They also don’t know how to make a lot of “noise” to grab eyes on the case and make things move.

I’m serious, in your situation you should have started contacting newspapers and TV exposing the company, the scammers, the lawyers, and the judge. It’s the only way to get justice here.

I’m a 40 years old Portuguese living in Lisbon since I was born, and I’m done with this society, it doesn’t represent me or my values. And in the last 10 years it’s just getting worse.

I work two jobs in the IT industry, my wife is a dental hygienist. We make more than the average Portuguese income. Still, we have to live like a teenager who got his first job bagging groceries.

The cost of living doesn’t make sense, the housing market is broken, the tax environment rewards mediocrity and punishes entrepreneurship.

My wife and I will be leaving the country this year. And I know many that are planning to will do the same.

Portugal is not the Hell that you portray in your website, but it’s definitely not the dream place to come to live that many influencers pushes on social media.

All the best to you, good luck!

 Reply
Luís Miguel Sequeira
 Reply to  Pedro
 1 year ago
While I mostly believe you’re correct, I will disagree with the affirmation that “Portugal is a very poor country” and “needs to catch up with modern society”.

The first affirmation is something deeply, deeply ingrained, through at least two centuries of past history, in the minds of the Portuguese. And it’s rooted so deeply that the effort to see things as they really are requires decades of effort.

The reality is quite different. Portugal, the country, is among the top 40 out of 250+ countries. That’s by far not a “poor” country; according to the IMF, Portugal is classified as an “advanced economy”.

However, the Portuguese are, broadly speaking, poor. It’s just a question of inequality, really; we’re not the worst case in Europe (by far), but certainly not on the top of the list (where the Nordic countries shine). This means that most of the wealth is concentrated only in a few individuals

House prices have risen higher in Portugal than salaries — and this ratio has been among the worst in Europe. This, in turn, means less disposable income. Which also means that salaries may have risen, the average GDP per capita may have increased, but the average Portuguese pays more just for living in Portugal than any other European — and that means that what is left from the paycheck at the end of the month is much less than what the average European has.

Note a few things, though…

The problem of talking about “averages”, like the economists do, is that it hides a lot of things. As the old saying goes, if one person eats a chicken, and another doesn’t eat anything at all, on average, both have eaten half a chicken, which is not bad. However, in the hidden reality behind the number, one person will have starved to death (while the other might die of morbid obesity, but that’s another statistic).

When looking at the “average” salary or the “average” income per capita in Portugal, the numbers are not really bad. The trouble is that the very few at the top contribute to the biggest portion of the overall number. In most countries of Europe, the top 10% richest people own as much as the remaining 90%, a trend which has remained stable, although the top 1% have been increasing their wealth even more, at the cost of the bottom 90%. This is where those “averages” fail. If, in Portugal, the top 10% earn ten times as much as the top 10% on the other European countries, if the remaining 90% earn just half as much, then, on “average”, Portugal would fit in the “normal” part of the curve, i.e., not far from the middle-of-the-road, so to speak.

While the above claim is not really easy to factually substanciate, it’s easier to go for the disposable income instead. Even though the average Portuguese may earn about the same what other Europeans would earn in similar circumstances, they pay much more for their cost of living — mainly housing and related services, such as water, power, fuel, etc. — than other Europeans. In limit, we should consider the very low prices of food in general, and in most of the service industry (especially the food industry): these are already very low and with a tendency to become lower (minus inflation and other adjustments, that is), simply because the purchasing power is so low. But if you buy a sack of potatoes, it costs as much if you’re poor as if you’re rich, and you pay the same VAT on the same services. Proportionally, therefore, there are lots of ways where the Portuguese millionaires can enjoy even more their disposable income than their European counterparts. The lower the price of goods and services — which is what Portuguese afford to buy — the more and more disposable income for the rich. Therefore, they are not only able to earn much more (the 10x is my own number, not confirmed, just postulated), but with what they have, after paying everything, they will remain with much more to spend.

In conclusion: it’s not that Portugal is a “poor country”. It isn’t, not by far. It’s a cheap country — if you’re a millionaire. It’s possibly the cheapest country in Europe where you can live — if you’re a millionaire.

But for the rest of us, it means that the majority of us will live with far less than the “average” salary — which is skewed towards those who are already wealthy.

One might argue that the same happens throughout Europe and, indeed, the world. Well, we cannot generalise that far: it’s a common trend among the 40 top “advanced economies”, but not all of them have exactly the same ratios, as said. But on the “not-so-advanced” economies things are far, far, far worse, with very few making an active, honest effort to get better, mostly because they have no incentive for doing so.

(Sources: IMF; Statista; Eurostat — it’s all there, you just need a bit of patience to dig the numbers out)

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Pedro
 1 year ago
Boa tarde Pedro,
You write ; ‘ I’m serious, in your situation you should have started contacting newspapers and TV exposing the company, the scammers, the lawyers, and the judge. It’s the only way to get justice here.’ I tried many many times to contact some newspapers in Portugal. Even that seems a problem. I called for more then 50 !! times to several. No one spoke proper English etc. When you can reccomend me a newspaper, a journalist I would be happy to contact him/her. Can’t tell you what nighmere I ve been through in Portugal. It was total horror ! Do you believe it will help to make a lot of noise via the media ? Please provide me a name of a newspaper / television program or anything. Obrigado.

 Reply
Nuno Ferreira
 Reply to  Pedro
 1 year ago
“Important note: This article and all the others on this blog are not about the 5% of decent Portuguese who care and who deserve all my sympathy and I sincerely wish them all the best, because I know what it is to be a person of integrity in Portugal. Nevertheless, the reality in Portugal is so severe and so ingrained in all strata of society that I have no other way to denounce it than to generalize.”

He is correct about most things.

The state of the portuguese justice is a mirror of portuguese society.

 Reply
Interlinked
 1 year ago
Congratulations for the content… Portugal really is a shithole.
It is a safe house for thieves, corrupt people, alcoholics and drug addict antidepressants.
Everything you publish is the truth, portugal is a scum shithole.

I’m Portuguese.

 Reply
Anónimo
 1 year ago
Thanks for sharing your story, thats why more than 50% of just gradutates are leaving to any country but Poortugal, the system is rigged and most of the population are to blind to see, they only see the propaganda in the television and wont change their voting habits if vote at all, many of us still try to fight for what this country CAN BE, but theres just too many people just admiring instead of helping… everything you said is true, and if you recieve hate comments those are people that either benefit from the system or are so blind they cant see the system….
Sorry for your wasted years, best of luck anywhere besides this garbage rulled country!

 Reply
lol lmao
 1 year ago
Good. Don’t ever come back.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  lol lmao
 1 year ago
Who wants to come back to your corrupted poor country ? Young educated people leave your country. You know why? Because they are educated. They are smart. The rest stays in dark Portugal.

 Reply
A giggling portuguese
 1 year ago
Least xenophobic “digital nomad”/”entrepreneur” ❤️ if you hadn’t failed back home, you wouldn’t have come in the first place

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  A giggling portuguese
 1 year ago
Dear giggling Portuguese,
Thank you for showing the general Portuguese level of empathy, delusion, education, arrogance and intelligence in one short comment.

 Reply
Lisa
 1 year ago
Thankyou for sharing your story. So many details ring true in relating to your experience. It’s like that Netflix show “The Good Place”. Thanks to people like you coming forward we’re really beginning to see and understand that evil underbelly that was never far from our perceptions but hard to quantify as we walked beautiful beaches and mountains and observed blue skies most days. But that feeling was always there. I really admire your bravery and honesty wish you a huge lot of luck!

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
There are 4 relatively new Facebook sites describing the hell of Portugal. Portugal Propaganda etc. Many have tried to put in a link to this site, but Facebook does not like the name!!!

Newspapers are beginning to publish the truth.

But, you were the first to really publicise just how bad and how primitive Portugal is. Well done. So many people’s lives are being destroyed by the Portuguese propaganda machine. Enough is enough.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
What are these 4 Facebook pages called?
I cannot find anything…

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Look up Portugal Propaganda, Why leave Portugal, Portugal Uncensored, Portugal whats good and whats bad, and Algarve Property, Problems and Deceptions. I am sure I do not have all the names correct. I came off Facebook for a while. Some of the stories were just too upsetting.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Thank you so much for your words of encouragement. It’s great to know that other sources are starting to come forward to expose the truth about Portugal’s true criminal nature. The more the merrier.
So I hope that many good people will have the opportunity to visit this open website, which I see as a public service by everyone for everyone. Information can save lives!

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
If I had seen your site before I arrived 8 years ago I doubt I would have moved to Portugal. My life has been totally destroyed. I have a half built house, a dog killed, living in fear of my life at secret addresses. I am in the process of organising personal security during the time I have to finish the house and get the hell out. It is just all so primitive. Lives don’t matter. I have heard so many people use the same phrase “descended on like a pack of vultures”. That has been what it is like for me for 3 years.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
I am so sorry for what happened to you, I don’t even have words, I think I read your story, much worse than any horror movie, in a British newspaper, but out of respect for your privacy I won’t post the link, unless you want to, in that case feel free to post the link.

Ironically, I also said that to my wife, I only wish I had read this site before I moved to this sh*thole, so I could save myself and my family from so much suffering, during so many years stupidly stolen from our lives.

Portugal is a country of inhuman savages who in terms of mindset have never left the stone age. Humanity has never reached Portugal. I cannot warn people enough that Portugal is an extremely dangerous, unpredictable and erratic country to live in, like no other in the world! Your life and dignity are worth ZERO in Portugal!

A big hug.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Thank you. I agree with you. Portugal is extremely dangerous. We need to warn people. So many people’s lives are being destroyed. I regularly get calls from a tiny 80 American lady. Twice she has been punched by neighbours – once for asking to pick up after the dog outside her little house. The other time she was trying to get her husband with dementia out of the back of a cab – the people behind got angry that she was taking so long.

Previously, she was driven off the road by a truck. She broke her neck and almost had her foot amputated – she moved to another hospital and they saved it. The usual zoo in court. She ended up with I think it was around 10k in damages.

I could go on and on. My dogminder’s parents are living in her garden shed. The mother was attacked by her neighbour in her apartment block, so had to move out. Nothing was done.

It’s a total nightmare.

Is there a reason you can’t drop the extra “o” in Portugal? Because that way more people would see this blog.

I’m glad you got out of the mess.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
In this case, it is an extremely appropriate pun for this miserable country, and I even think, more or less jokingly, that it should be the formal form adopted by the whole world from now on when mentioning Poortugal and not Portugal.

Poor (tugal) Scum! It says it all in a nutshell and it is guaranteed to be a unique name, which is very beneficial.

Thanks for your interest, but IMO it doesn’t harm the search, as long as the site gains notoriety, Google will follow. In fact, when you search for Portugalscum, Google also shows this site in first place, because it knows that’s what people are looking for.

I will never stop fighting with all my might for this site, which I see as a public service. Of all the evil that this criminal country has done to me, I’m going to do a billion times more good by helping others and preventing more life tragedies, in whatever way is humanly possible for me.

 Reply
Daniel
 1 year ago
First of all thanks for being honest and saying it like it is. I’ve been here since 2009 and really tried to find the good in these people , reading your horror stories makes me realise that it’s not only me that sees it how it really is . I’m even more convinced it’s my time to leave Portugal and go back to the Uk.

 Reply
Anonymous
 1 year ago
You re doing a great job.
Please keep this site in thr air forever and try to make it as big as you can. I have had a horrifying experience in Portugal. Cant go too much into details. I am still afraid, but the judiciary is rotten till the core. I have never seen a more unreliable vicious, toxic and evil population in my entire life. One day, I will reveal my story at your site. Thank you for having this site!

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
You can also join one of the new Facebook sites. People on them are beginning to communicate and provide practical assistance to each other.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Thank you very much for your encouragement, it means a lot to me 🙂 That’s my intention with all my might!

It’s about time a website appeared that reveals the truth about this tyranny of criminals THAT IS NOT a democracy, which is deceiving the whole world and destroying lives every day, with all the impunity, connivance and cowardice of practically an entire nation of people who are the same.

A lot of malicious propaganda and lies coming from Portuguese entities and Portugal in general, which pollute the entire internet and television, are over! Now the world can know and see the horrible truth about Portugal and defend itself, through my words and news (of the very meagre I can find, unfortunately), and above all through your painful testimonies! May this site be visited a lot, and may many more sites with content of this nature appear in the future! It’s a question of justice and morality that concerns every decent person. Portugal is a country that is totally incompatible with the modern, democratic world.

Portugal has much more in common with North Korea than with a country like Germany or the Netherlands, for example. The chilling thing is that it’s really true!

 Reply
Tam
 1 year ago
Thankyou for your blog, I never knew others felt the same, I have been beating myself up for years thinking I was the problem feeling bad about how I felt towards the country and people.
That is how isolated me and my husband had become, a total contrast to our usual easy integration into other countries and communities.
You have been the spark catalyst to finally sell up and move on, and seriously saved my marriage
I thank you from my heart.
My story has echos of yours but not to the extreme of yours
I am sorry you and your wife went through this terrible time in life and hope you are both doing so much better and karma repays you in full if not double.
Best regards to you and your wife

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Tam
 1 year ago
Dear Tam,

I am so, so happy for you that you have been saved from the madhouse of Portugal and can now finally focus on your happiness and dreams, which you have every right to 🙂 I am sure you are now very happy people again 🙂

Portugal is extremely poisonous and therefore very dangerous, because it always ends up making us doubt ourselves and our common sense, that is, when we don’t know the truth about that rotten-to-the-bone society full of very evil and factually insane people. In Portugal, the problem is never us, as long we are good and productive people, that is, after all, being normal people, which is not possible in Portugal. And the reason is always the attitude, mentality, lack of character and endemic insanity of the Portuguese in general, which constantly crushes us and tries to take away all our dignity, but we can never, never let that happen! If there is a hell on earth, it is Portugal without a doubt, and because of the Portuguese.

Thank you, thank you, we are infinitely better off now! It’s incredible how good we feel just by physically leaving Portugal for good and never going back. Now everything is fine, we are ourselves and whole again! Everything is possible again 🙂 Life is a gift, an adventure and above all human relationships, love and respect, but in Portugal there is only evil, run away!

I wish you and your family the best of luck and great success in your new life, after the real hell you’ve been through, but which is thankfully behind you now!

 Reply
Graeme Walker
 1 year ago
“My own comments about Poortugal’s poor economy and the continued efforts by its elite class of wankers to indoctrinate the populace into superstitious beliefs is merely a critique of Portugal’s continuing corporatist regime” https://www.pedrasdelrei.org/blog/begin-forwarded-message

 Reply
Anon
 1 year ago
Hi, thank you for writing this all up. I’ve lived in Portugal for 5 years and as far as I can see it’s true that fraud is a way of life, unfortunately. I think the EU should insist on anti-corruption measures more assertively and rigorously – start with a functioning legal system and go from there. Although, I’m not sure if it could, or is allowed to, or would consider it worthwhile.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anon
 1 year ago
Hi, the problem is that the whole of Portugal works like a con man, from the bottom up and from the top down, in the sense that Portugal very readily signs up to all the humanitarian treaties and anti-corruption laws and whatnot, just for the sake of appearing to be a country full of serious people, which is the exact opposite of the truth, so it’s all a complete farce the size of the country itself. Not only are the anti-crime and anti-corruption laws deliberately designed full of loopholes by the corrupt politicians themselves, and even when this isn’t the case, the authorities, namely Portuguese judges and public prosecutors, simply ignore the letter of the law and make their own words the new law in order to get their “friends” off the hook.

The concept of Portugal as a country governed by the rule of law and democracy is a total scam, because what exists as Portugal is just a bunch of criminals and crooks who protect each other behind the façade of sovereign country, where in any other country they would all have been locked up a long time ago.

Portugal has been making a mockery of the EU and its tax payers since ever. I wonder how long Europeans will swallow this? Since it’s the billions of euros of EU taxpayers’ money we’re talking about.
To begin with, it is obvious that the EU must immediately stop sending our money to this deeply undemocratic cesspool called Portugal. It is revolting that this isn’t the case, given all the evidence!

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Are people aware of the general amnesty for serious crime that was granted after the Papal Visit and World Youth Day? Even the lawyers’ regulatory body will do nothing about lawyers’ criminal behaviour due to the amnesty. The same for doctors and other professionals, as one of my Portuguese friends discovered. It is absolutely bizarre. Portugal is a very primitive society. Life is cheap.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
https://abreuadvogados.com/en/conhecimento/publicacoes/get-to-know-the-law-on-pardon-of-penalties-and-amnesty-for-offences/

Here ☝🏻 the amnesty law is explained…
Go check…
It does not include serious crimes.

The challenge is to find an honest person in this country who follows the law…

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
They are using it to forgive serious crimes. The head of the Supreme Court said it was being used to forgive serious misbehaviour by judges. I saw it being used to forgive attempted blackmail and extortion.

 Reply
Luís Miguel Sequeira
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
“Serious misbehaviour by judges” is not “serious crime”.

Serious crimes are crimes commited against people’s integrity — murder, rape, aggression, and so forth.

Serious misbehaviour is… well, whatever the Order of Magistrates considers it to be 🙂 A slap on your hand and a word of “you naughty judge, you! now back to your bench and don’t sin again” is usually the remedy.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Luís Miguel Sequeira
 1 year ago
Attempted blackmail and extortion by lawyers, according to the Ordem, is a crime that was forgiven – even though extortion is regarded as a serious crime. The head of the Supreme Court commented last year on the serious offences committed by judges being forgiven.

 Reply
Anon
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
I see the problem. Keep up the good work highlighting this corruption.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Anon
 1 year ago
I noticed this blog is being shared now on quite a few Facebook sites etc. Well done.

 Reply
Distressed
 1 year ago
Joke of the day. A Portuguese friend said to me “do you know why the Mafia don’t come to Portugal?”. Answer. “Because they would be robbed”.

 Reply
Luís Miguel Sequeira
 Reply to  Distressed
 1 year ago
Heh 🙂

Actually, Portugal’s organised crime has been in the hands of the Russian Mafia since the late 1990s. Local police forces didn’t even know how to tackle them and had to be trained elsewhere.

In Portugal, what you have most is so-called “unorganised crime”, which might be far less violent, but nevertheless destroys lives.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Luís Miguel Sequeira
 1 year ago
Not true. I know so many Portuguese people who have suffered violent crime. Domestic violence is endemic,for instance. Re organised crime – the Algarve alone is riddled with drug dealers of every nationality. Lisboa is a known major European port for human trafficking. This myth that Portugal is a safe country needs to go. If crime is not recorded there is no crime.

 Reply
Denis
 Reply to  Anonymous
 2 months ago
Was living in many countries but first robbery attempt was in Portugal. I was lucky to avoid damage but after resistance they tried to throw stone , it was quite near my head. Police didnt investigate anything just closed everything after 2 month

 Reply
Anon57
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Very well said “THE MYTH THAT PORTUGAL IS A SAFE COUNTRY NEEDS TO GO!”
Portugal is more concerned about keeping up good appearances and keeping their statistics looking good, than actually addressing the wide spread crime epidemic in all areas.
They want to portray Portugal as safe and friendly so that foreigners will invest and tourists will come spend their money. It’s just another scam.
Portugal is not safe, nor friendly.
It is a Godless free-for-all.

 Reply
Lobo Bolsas
 1 year ago
I don’t know what happened to you but for sure your anger is out of control. You write “about me” and just deliver the same boundless sermon like everywhere in your text – them bad, them bad, them robbed me. I hope you get well soon.

 Reply
Distressed
 Reply to  Lobo Bolsas
 1 year ago
He/she is 100% correct. The Portuguese are absolute savages. I have lived in multiple countries but nothing, nothing prepared me for the savagery of these people.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Lobo Bolsas
 1 year ago
Lobo, The author is right. I have had the worst experiences in Portugal. It was a complete nightmere to live there. A primitive, corrupt country with many vicious people. This whole culture sucks. They should kicked out of the EU. Btw, I have lived in 5 different countries, Portugal was by far the worst.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Lobo Bolsas
 1 year ago
Poortuguese like you are the reason why this site is called PoortugalSCUM. Your very “honest” and “intelligent” words perfectly prove everything I say on this site about the genetic profound lack of character and retardness of the vast majority of Portuguese people (but not all), which is why your country is doomed to disappear, which it WILL. We are in the 21st century and you little Portuguese have never left the Stone Age. I tell you, every day that you wake up and look at your ugly mug in the mirror, you know that the undeniable truth is that you were born a shitty loser and that’s how you’re going to die, and the sooner the better.

 Reply
MjknowsPTisash*thole
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Oh my God you are still on this page…Thank God!

First, I just woke up to the facts of who these portuscum are and honestly, your missive and literary style is the only thing that helps me laugh at my somewhat dire situation and the sheer collective retardation (and that is not a word I use lightly) of the portuscum.

These people are asinine and completely brain dead including those of the “law”… they are not atheistic but actually just open users of sorcery in my very humble opinion… they are a strange and very dirty brood of vipers.

I am also praying for their expulsion from the EU…after they have robbed you as a society, they love trying to act superior to you, as an American this is so laughable because they are so poor, filthy, and pathetic that even if I was on my last cent, they could never impress me with their ill-begotten gain and lewdness.

Thank you for telling the truth, it only makes sense after it happens to you but knowing the someone gets it is the best part about your work.

I am sorry about you €130k, I loathe that you lost six years to this mess- time is so much more valuable to me, lastly you are a great writer and very brave for telling the truth. I hope you are in an environment where know not to cough and spit dangerous respiratory illnesses on other people.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  MjknowsPTisash*thole
 1 year ago
I just calculated the financial costs to me of the dire level of corruption I have been experiencing – €50,000, so far. I have been digging into my pension to pay these costs. That is before the psychological damage the Portuguese have done to me. I will never recover from the damage done.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
I had a horrible experience in Portugal as well. Courtcases, biased judges ( corrupt? ) , unfair trials. Not one right of the ECHR was honoured. A nightmere. Spread it out the news. Make this blog bigger and bigger.

Last edited 1 year ago by Jens
 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  MjknowsPTisash*thole
 1 year ago
Hi,

Thank you very much for your empathy, and for your kind and very encouraging words, they really mean a lot to me. Thank you also for thinking I’m a good writer :), but I’m just some guy.

Building this website/blog, which I see more as a public service, came out of my gut with a lot of pain and blood, but it was all worth it, because it can help people, which fills my heart with joy! This website informs and is a mouthpiece for all foreigners and also for the few decent Portuguese who have been and are ostracized by this deeply putrid society, simply because we (foreigners as well the very few decent Portuguese) “dare” aspire to have a normal life, and contribute to the development of this so ungrateful “country”. In this way, I, and all of you, the commenters on the articles, who contribute so much, through your valuable comments, to spreading and consolidating the message about the real Portugal, in order to avoid the emergence of more victims of the false propaganda of the Portuguese State in collusion with Portuguese society in general.

In the end, I have to say that this is all a great shame and sadness, because all of us foreign citizens, in principle, must have liked Portugal very much in the beginning, that’s why we chose Portugal to live in, to integrate and to contribute, within our possibilities, as much as possible to its development, however, the way Portugal welcomes us and thanks us is by stomping on us with a boot with all its might.

Regarding the EU, it is in no way fair and acceptable for Portugal to receive all these billions of euros from EU taxpayers, simply for the money to be stolen by the installed dictatorship of countless crooks, which is what has always happened and will continue to happen, if the EU does not stop sending our money, as European citizens, to that cesspool. That’s why Portugal doesn’t belong to the EU.

I like and embrace all the cultures of the world, I just can’t stand dishonest, malicious and idiotic people, “attributes” that in the end always go hand in hand. Underneath the thick veneer, in my opinion, 95% of the Portuguese population is like this, to a greater or lesser degree. Such a disproportion between good and evil makes everything practically impossible and extremely painful to do or solve. Everything in Portugal is a waste of time! The Portuguese are the best in the world at making you poor and wasting all your precious time. I only have one piece of advice for everyone: leave Portugal as soon as you can, or better still, never come, at least not to live!

I wish you all the best my friend, and that you manage to untie all the knots that this damned country has put in you. I think the most important thing is for people to know the truth about where they are so that they can defend themselves, and then it might be easier, sooner or later, to get out of that hellhole. Lots and lots of strength to you and stay safe!

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Very good advice. Leave Portugal as soon as you can. I started off badly – cheated by an accountant. Got over that. Then all hell broke loose. I look forward to the day I can leave, never to return. The very worst time in my life has been in Portugal.

 Reply
Xixxexxishxxeshishhh
 Reply to  Anonymous
 1 year ago
Stay the FUQUE away from the poortuguese dentists! Beware!!!!

 Reply
João
 1 year ago
Thank you for exposing the thruth about Portugal. I am a Portuguese and I take your criticism seriously. I am flawed just like any of us here. By acknowledging this issue next to you a non-portuguese, I want to believe that I try to be more open minded than most people.

In order for you to try and make since on the mess we’re in I would like you to search a german historiannon youtube under the nsme Kraut. He describes very well and fairly the situation in Greece which as many paralels with our own.

Here is what I am talking about:
https://youtu.be/404IeUzGNZ4?si=-vsw-ml-3fn3e6U7

Although this guy also makes a good point:
https://youtu.be/ENqri-GyMbQ?si=dWD_NdLG0stMjkoz

So take what I write to you with a grain of salt.

I think that you drank the kool-aid and jumped in too fast into settling here. If the country is currently losing population and is constantly not growing according to EU data since ever, one should ask some questions. Of all the places you decided to invest in productive activity. That’s a big no-no. I’m surprised how naive you where.

Still what happened, happened. I understand your anger and you have my solidarity. I personally redpill any foreigner coming here on how bad everything is. I have tried to save a few people and explained how things run around here. We inherited a pretty nasty economic background named corporativism. It is so ingrained that hardly any competition or inovation pops up. To make things worse we rank 4th position in brain drain. The population is pretty old thus adverse to change. And believe me when I tell you that in the 50’s and 60’s there was real poverty. Not the type of poverty as in ‘oh man I can buy Elvis lattest albun.’ But poverty like real hunger and shoeless kids… something out of industrial revolution setting. Minus the factories.

Anyway I find it just a bit strange that you failed to do friends. As an autist I do realize that people here are quite horrible. Just to give you an example I was a virgin up until a few months ago, and I am 41. As a foreigner people see you as a cash cow because none of you end up staying. The racism you talk works like this. I’m going to describe the normie setup. You’re whiter than us come, give us the money, and then do whatever you want. You are darker than us leave because we know what dark people are like. The racism towards brazillians works precisely like this, plus they are seen as portuguese without any rules. Personally I see foreigners as being a good influence. I recall having picked up many good work pratices during my university years. I am an exception. Still to this day the contact with foreigners and more organized ways of doing things enabled me to give some very valid advice in work as well scold an employer wanting my experience while paying peanuts. I am am autist so bear with me. Even greater Lisbon is an exception. You just don’t know how bad everything is outside certain richer parts.

People have been so beaten up throughout the years that the selfishness you mention is self preservation mode. In a way the racism you denounce is a remnant of the national unity in it’s more primary form (ethno nationalism). Just to tell you how bad things are we’re losing population so bad that those avoid the taxes schemes to bring in rich people so the soycislists leech from them. This is just one scheme. Another one is to open up the borders to thd third world, thus flooding the EU with migrants. I personally denounced a portuguese law that went against the Schengen area laws. Our very corrupt elite wanted to make a visa free law enabling all portuguese speaking nations to allow free entry. Of corse Portugal is also a heaven for mugration mafias. There is a whole industry with SEF and industanisn mafias literally selling documents for as cheaply as 200€.

I would like to tell you so much things that me and a couple of us find so shamefull. I would also like to explain how honest people get crushed here, although I suspect that you already have a first hand knowledge of how things work. Still it was worse. Did you know that our constitution, explicitly prohibits nationalistic far right parties? So how does Chega exist? They simply contituted themselves as a normal generic party then they backstabbed the regime.

It’s the only one trying to change things and still it’s already being contaminated by the regime’s machine. Give it a few years. I would like to redpill your fellow countrymen, but in spite of living in Cascais in the nice area I never get to meet english at the games shop. I do have an idealized vision of England. Of a friendly nation. And I am aware that I am autist. I even worked for an English man once producing quantity surveying lists and I even explained him some secrets of the trade snd gave him valuable advice for him not to be ripped off by contractors. I beliebe he left, still how do yoh english here in Portugal become friends of portuguese. You seem to attract lots of crappy people. In my gaming event I assume that an inocuous event such as that would attract smart nerdy english. So far in three years only a very cringe politically correct canadian portuguese and an english south african popped up. I see certain aspects of your culture very valid to absorb specially in what concerns work culture snd organization. In nerdy events such as wargaming having english os also usefull :). I have doxxed myself enough, still I find pity that all the people who you meet see you as a cash cow. In the anglosphere becoming rich through merit and work is possible. Here you just make others richer. I am guilty to believe that if I meet a rich portuguese I assume that the money has no honest origins. I coukd have become corrupt since I am a construction professional, but I choose to sleep well. I agree that by fighting and accomplishing goals one finds happiness in life. I do have my goals and I feel the pain when you want to invest in machines and find mongoloids in your way. I have a university degree still I love learning and I wanted to set up shop in metal mechanics making engines or casting and milling metal. I feel that pain.

I still live with my parents. They are old and I have no State to count on but my family. Self preservation mode. Families are the last to go. I coukd have jumped ship, but I decided to stay and change things a bit. I most certainly will not accomplish anything palpable here, but the important thing is to try. I don’t vote for the local mafias, and even for this new oposition (chefa) I’m keeping my guard up. They will commit the same flaws that others did, but being funded by that milionaire in the States probably they will try to change somethings.

I still have some moral left in me to fight. I have to do it in hiding like a Resistance fighter. The last judge who tried to speak against control got sacked and his life destroyed. So anyone trying to make a change has to be carefull. This is going to take centuries. It took 30 years fir the elites to allow small parties into the parliement.

As an architect it is indeed a ugly urban landscape we have and I thank you for showing how bad everything is. I constantly bitch my professional order to bring topics into the public discussion that affects the everyday life of the citizen. I don’t even practice my profession, because the pay is hirrible and because I alreafy git burned in the city hall when I filled complaints on how retarded the institutions are. Autarchies are an adversary of the citizen, not a servant.

I would lke to invite you to fight alongside and don’t give up (and stay) but I don’t have any moral to. If you stayed long enough you would have seen some good. I suspect that your golden visa is ending. You probably will call me a loser for being who I am, and I understand that you are coming from a bad place. I can’t change that. Still I would like you to know that we as a people were worse than we are now and I pity that you allowed people to approach you that are shitty, still don’t judge the whole by the part… sorry the very tiny part by the whole. What a pity that you couldn’t have been better advised. I redpilled my friend Dorota Powtak from Poland for her not to call in foreigners unless they want to visit or stay living in the middle of nowhere where nobody bugs them or until fezes hit the fan.

Keep up the good work and sorry for me being crappy. Some of us do feel shame, I just wished you were better informed and actually knew people worth keeping in touch. But nah you know judges… and lawyers.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  João
 1 year ago
Hello friend,

I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart for taking the time to write such a sincere, rich, profound and revealing comment about Portuguese society and the personality of the Portuguese in general. Your comment is an asset to this site.

I don’t know you, but I believe that you are a very good person and of great value to any country, however, Portugal only despises people like you, exactly because you are what you are, a decent person full of talents (which the mediocre and dishonest hate because it shadows them and ruins their “cheating games”). If I had met you while I was in Portugal, I would have very much liked to have had you as a friend 🙂

What I write in my articles necessarily reveals, as it couldn’t be any other way, only and only, my empirical and anecdotal experience of life in that beautiful country, but sadly populated by very bad people for the most part. So, of course, there are infinite nuances to what I say, even contradictory ones. Each person is different, each story is different. I don’t know the percentage of bad people who live in this country, whether it is 5%, 10%, 15%, however, much more important than a number, is the real experience for many people, that evil in that country is omnipresent and always has the last word, one way or another, sooner or later. And that is terrifying and incompatible with happiness and being human.

I sincerely wish you the best of luck and that you find your path!

 Reply
Distressed
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
I do wish you could change the title of your blog to just Portugalscum.com. I am not sure why you cannot. I have seen your blog now being posted on various Facebook sites. Your blog serves as a warning to those people who come across it. All is not “wonderful” in Portugal and it is about time there is someone exposing the bad side to prevent more innocent victims believing the non stop “propaganda” littering the international audience. Keep up the good work.

 Reply
João
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Thank you still I wish you guys got to know the country and we’re you’re getting into before trying to do anything. Although I’m an autist i learned how to play by the local rules not without pain I might add. I pity that foreigners in general don’t try to truly know locals and ask opinions. Still like I said if you wanna come here and live in the middle of nowhere bugging bobody it’s a good place to do so. So good that the pineal cult is gaining tracktion living completly apart from everyone. So far a baby died and the law didn’t do a thing. 🙁

 Reply
Chen
 1 year ago
Hi i just found your blog and just wanted to say thank you so much for telling the truth!!! I share a similar story only it cost me six years of my life and 70000 EUR. Im sick of everyone coming here as visitors and telling me what are you talking about its such a wonderful place and the people are amazing. So really thank you for this 🙏

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Chen
 1 year ago
I am very sorry for your nightmare, but don’t let this hellhole destroy you, because you are a great person.

 Reply
FedUpPortuga
 2 years ago
I am Portuguese myself, and, like to think i am one of the few good guys, currrently searching and looking forward to move, of course i don’t agree with everything, but mostly the author of this blog is correct, Portugal is one of the worst countries in Europe to live in, the reasons being, the portuguese character (or lack of) and the hierarchical power structures, i don’t even think Portugal should exist, it should be, as in the beginning, a part of Spain, the many problems the country as it’s precisely because it wanted to be independent, and because it had to differentiate from spain, it constructed a identity rooted in colonialism, hence the third world fondness and cultural aspects, it’s a North African/South American mentalitty in a European country.

But i do hope more blogs lor social media like these appear, because there is a lot of brainwashing and stupidity when one talks about Portugal.

 Reply
Nameless
 Reply to  FedUpPortuga
 9 months ago
Brazilian here, you got this backwards. Europeans brought this dishonest mentally to the Americas, not the other way around.

 Reply
Distressed
 Reply to  FedUpPortuga
 1 year ago
That is what one journalist said to me – Portugal is a third world country pretending to be European!

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  FedUpPortuga
 2 years ago
Hi,

I wish you the best of luck and a great and happy future.

Unfortunately, the majority of the Portuguese managed to destroy a land with so much potential, whether through action or inaction. The good Portuguese and other decent people of other nationalities who live in Portugal are totally powerless in the face of such overwhelming ingrained mediocrity and dishonesty.

A very interesting point, in my view, the only thing that Portuguese independence serves is to protect its infinite crooks and corrupt from ever facing justice for their crimes, as we horrified see that happening every day. I will speculate that, it doesn’t surprise me that this was the real reason behind Portugal’s independence. That’s when the propaganda and brainwashing started.

 Reply
Daria
 2 years ago
Hello!

Just casually found yours site searching for info about Portuguese mentality.. I recently met a guy online, we spoke for some time online and on videocalls and he seemed to be nice, although I saw some indications later on that he might have a angry temper, but anyway I decided to see him in person.

So when we met in person and I spent some time with him in Portugal I saw a lot of issues with his character, extreme narcissism, anger issues, disrespect towards me, pettiness, lots of severe red flag flaws to be honest. This is at the same time that the guy seemed to be an intelligent person, but morally he was.. like that. At the same time apparently he was unable to self-reflect and see how badly he was treating me and if I said any criticism he would just keep silent and never say sorry.

I was stupid enough to stay in touch with him later on to keep talking online, with him showing me more of his poor treatment towards me and as the last drop, he insulted my mother when we were discussing some information I’ve heard from her. So at that point I had to stop all communication because all possible limits of decency have been crossed. And that’s it for my short Portuguese story. I don’t think that all the people in the country are like that, but somehow I see that many people can be like that how you describe it here in this blog, that’s so bad as at first I was a bit charmed by this country, but I see it has quite many problems!

 Reply
Pray for me please
 2 years ago
Good day,
Thank you for this site.

My story:
I dated a Portuguese guy for three years, abroad. He was the perfect guy. It was the best three years of my life. I was saving all my money to buy n home, as I do not have any family of my own nor a family house. I spent 12 years traveling the world, lived and worked in 4 different countries, with different languages and religions.
The perfect guy proposed, with the condition we’ll live in his country, to start a family and to make me part of his family, as I didn’t have one of my own.
So I spent my life savings on buying an apartment in Portugal.
As soon as I arrived, he turned into a monster. Gaslighting, insults, death treats, as he summoned me to court to get divorced.
I was absolutely destroyed, I didn’t understand what was happening.
He had left me in a place where I didn’t speak the language, therefore unable to get a job, without transport and without any support.
I didn’t understand what was happening to me, until my lawyer explained that he has taken my money and registered everything in his name! Obviously I did not hand over thousands of euros without insisting on a contract, however his lawyer was in on it and they managed to do it “legally”…
5 years have passed, in these 5 years I’m still stuck in this absolute cesspool of demons. I have managed to teach myself the language and am almost fluent. However in 3 and a half years of working, I have had 6 jobs, and every time they “just get rid of me”. In all of the jobs I have been bullied and ostracised. In two of the jobs I was physically pulled around by my arm. In another one I was physically attacked by another woman (luckily 3 guys held her back, as she tried to fight them off to get to me). Two other jobs I was screamed at so badly, I just start crying and rocking with my hands over my ears waiting for the rant to end (which only seemed to prolong the abuse, as they seemed to like the effect it had on me). In my last job, one employee told me “I’m going to make things so awkward for you, until you just leave”. I ignored him, so he kicked it up a notch to hitting me with his shoulder when I passed him in the hallways, swearing at me, and started smearing my name with lies. As I was out of options, I reported him for harassment and bullying. The director and manager simply replied “that’s not possible”.
I consequently lost my job, again.
Now I’m on unemployment, attending programs they have in place for all the foreigners looking for work (surprise, surprise). At one of these “presentation” I asked the presenter “If my employer told me: ‘Your work is great, we cannot find any flaw with your work, but you don’t fit in here’ Is that not discrimination?” He replied, without hesitation and absolute certainty “No”.
I’m still waiting for the courts to resolve the issue…
And in the meantime I have discovered that the lawyer I have hired is completely incompetent and only focussed on the money.
I’m absolutely destroyed, and at the end of my ropes.
I am filled with utter disgust and hate for the level of blatant Racism here, towards anyone who is not of Portuguese descent.
I have never been a negative person, I’m an Empath (a Portuguese Pig’s favourite meal).
I cannot believe I’m living in the year 2023, it feels like the middle ages.

Thank you for the opportunity to voice my story.
I was horrified by your story, and I would like to extend my empathy towards you and your wife.

I think this website is an absolutely necessary platform for people to come together, and let the world know, what is really happening in this Godforsaken, Godless hellhole cesspool of abusive, ignorant, arrogant, racist bullies.

There are not enough adjectives in the world, to describe these children of Satan.
Portuguese are direct descendants of Satan himself.

Please pray for me 🙏🏻

 Reply
Nameless
 Reply to  Pray for me please
 9 months ago
I’m sorry you are going through all that. I hope you come out of this alright.

 Reply
Nameless
 Reply to  Pray for me please
 9 months ago
Bro, it’s the exact same thing down here in Brazil(except for more violent crime ofc). These people are envious and incapable. No wonder socialist/communist rhetoric is so successful in these cultures. My Portuguese relatives destroyed each other in court. They have no empathy whatsoever. I can’t wait to get out of Brazil. I sent your blog to my sister, she wants to migrate to Portugal with her husband and kids. We visited Portugal in 2016,we had a horrible experience. I have never felt so much hostility in my life because of my nationality. Somehow, she doesn’t mind it. I’m warning her that things are worse for people that live there. There is no such thing as climbing the social ladder in Portugal. I’m advising her to migrate to Canada or Australia. Much better cultures.

 Reply
Distressed
 Reply to  Pray for me please
 1 year ago
Oh dear. I “did” 6 years with my Portuguese partner. That was enough. You have all my sympathy. I hope things improve for you. I have heard so many bad stories in relation to women who get involved with Portuguese men.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Pray for me please
 2 years ago
I have red your story with great disbelieve, although, I lived in Portugal for a while and my experiences ( which I cannot share here to protect myself ) were the most horrible ever in my entire life. I believe everything you wrote and I feel very sorry for what happend to you. The Portuguese people are ( not all of course but the majority ) horrible, they are vicious, toxic and evil. That is my experience of living in that backward country and yes : they are very racist as well. I wish you all the best and this site should become bigger and bigger.

 Reply
Pray for me please
 Reply to  Jens
 2 years ago
Thank you for your supportive words Jens, I really appreciate it. My heart goes out to you as well, for the horrible time you went through.
It is truly soul destroying and life changing.
Nobody deserves to go through this persistent endless hell.
Nobody.
I wish you all the best, with a happy and prosperous future free from this hell.
Thank you again
🙏🏻

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Pray for me please
 2 years ago
My dear,

What you tell us here is so horrible that it makes me angry and my heart hurts with great sadness, yet that is so typical and common to a large part of Portuguese society. I know what most Portuguese are, so I deeply understand your words. All those people who attacked and robbed you are big cowards, but in Portugal that scum is protected by more scum that are inside the system that is supposed to protect the victims, so it is practically impossible to find any real help in Portugal, even paying dearly. Most of the Portuguese population is made up of an undifferentiated mass of people full of grave character defects, practically without traces of humanity and owners of a very typical Portuguese icy psychological evilness, unparalleled anywhere in the world. If there is a hell on earth, it is surely in Portugal, but disguised.

Portugal is probably the country in the world with the highest number of crooks per capita.

I wish you with all my strength that you find the happiness that was so violently ripped from you by the Portuguese, as happened to me and countless other victims around the world. Worst of all is not even the money they steal from us, which is obviously extremely traumatic and devastating in itself, but rather the nullification of our very person, our soul, our joy for life. Portugal robs us of our very inner being.

I know that you are in a very difficult spot, but I hope and I really believe that with a lot of inner strength, you will be able to get out of that Portugal hell in a favorable way, and that you will find the happiness that you deserve so much, because the truth is that Portugal only takes and keep taking forever… (if we never leave)

Thank you so much for your words of support for the blog and for me and my wife, very, very fortunately our love for each other has never been as strong as it is now, Portugal has not managed to destroy it, however, our relationship has suffered immensely during the years we had there due to the devastating psychological torture of dealing with a society of sociopaths, especially when you most need help, you only find crooks and indifference in Portugal.

 Reply
Pray for me please
 Reply to  Blog Author
 2 years ago
Thank you very much for your support and empathy, it really does mean a great deal to me.
I believe you are doing very needed and necessary work through this website.
I applaud and respect the time you are dedicating to inform and warn other innocent uninformed future investors. I wish I had come across this site sooner, but like you, I’m sharing my story in the hopes that it may “save” other unsuspecting investors.
Thank you again, for your time, effort, empathy and support.
I wish you and your family all that is beautiful, harmonious, healthy and positive.
God bless you
🙏🏻

 Reply
Swindled
 Reply to  Blog Author
 2 years ago
Good evening,

I came across your site and I have to say that, even though all the experiences described are beyond comprehension and utterly inhumane, it is good to know that I am not the only person who experienced that Portugal is an absolute hellhole.

I have lived in different continents and have never in my life experienced this level of inhumane treatment. Not only that, I have never been ostracised like this before. The Portuguese have no interest in anyone else but themselves. It is appalling to enter everyday service institutions without any worries and leaving the same place by feeling completely cut down and shattered, because of the treatment of foreigners by Portuguese people. It is soul destroying the way foreigners are treated here.
I never expected such heartless, cold and utterly rude people. They are openly racist, have no respect for other people and It is mind boggling, demoralising and crazy-making.

I had a similar experience to the user “Please pray for me”. I dated a Portuguese man for 4 years ( not in Portugal). He also knew that I did not have parents anymore and wanted me to come live in Portugal to have a future together. It was the plan to relocate as soon as it was possible for me and I did. To cut a very long story short, he completely vanished and also left me stranded in this hellhole without speaking the language and without knowing any other people.
I spent thousands upon thousands, gave up my whole life, my family and friends and sold all my possessions to start a new life and future in Portugal with him.

In hindsight, I feel like he wanted me to suffer and break me by being so mean and cruel by disappearing into thin air. I felt as if someone had died unexpectedly, because there was no indication that he could vanish. No fight, no nothing. He just completely vanished. I literally went into shock and was mentally so drained, I could not get out of bed.

It took me months to uncover the truth. Turns out he lived a double life and everything he told and promised me were lies. Who knows, maybe even more women were tricked by him. I was destroyed when I found this out. Who does this to another human being ? After I had spent so much money and had such high hopes for a beautiful future. It is beyond comprehension how anybody could have lied so well all those years and would be so cruel to destroy my whole life. He clearly planned that he would just disappear. I have a lot of trauma because now, I don’t trust anyone anymore and most days I do not want to leave my apartment.

My time in Portugal has been the worst time of my life. I have been ignored, been overcharged, more money has been stolen, I have been misled by more people and the list goes on.

I never thought that something like this would happen to me ever… but it all happened and all because I trusted someone for 4 years who ended up being the biggest con artist, predator and sadist.

I also pray to leave this country soon and to live among normal civilised people with proper manners again.

 Reply
Anon in Azores
 Reply to  Swindled
 1 year ago
I am just finding this website and although I personally have Portuguese ancestry and feel an instinctive need to defend the people and culture, my experience immigrating back to Portugal has been unfortunately not dissimilar to many of the stories here. If not from my personal experience, from those I have observed.

This comment in particular rings true for my situation in that I came here for a month-long holiday and met a man who I then corresponded with and had a relationship with for a year who made many promises of having a life together and professed his love for me, and me having such a magical experience on my visit and wanting to reconnect with my roots, left my home country, career, friends and family, spend thousands of euros, and uprooted my entire life to come only to immediately have my dreams shattered as inflation had taken hold, I was swindled immediately by locals taking advantage of my naïveté and being “foreign” (which immediately they believe means wealthy lol), the insane bureaucracy and inefficiency…and of course the man I mentioned was dishonest and also living a double life and had only the intention of having a casual, sexual relationship (cheating, because he lied) until he didn’t and completely disappeared.

Two years later I am increasingly jaded and yet feel incredibly stuck and now have not the means to even move back to my home country at this time. I do not know what to do. And you cannot have an intelligent, thoughtful conversation with anyone here. And the more you tell about yourself, the more they use it against you. No true friends here.

Meanwhile, tourism is booming and people are filling the streets like greedy ants nibbling the best parts of what those of us who live here can barely enjoy, leaving us the crumbs and then telling all the other ants to “go to Portugal! It’s so beautiful! Everything is cheap! The people are so kind and friendly!” Ugh….

Anyway, i empathize with you all and wish there was a support group for us.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Swindled
 2 years ago
Hi,

I’m really sorry you had to go through this. I wish that even after so much pain you can move on and I am sure you do, because you are the person who has value, whoever is capable of doing this is a monster and will always be a big loser.
Unfortunately it’s true, in Portugal you can’t trust anything or anyone, especially in important matters, so you have to be extremely cautious, which makes living in Portugal very sad and difficult.

 Reply
Thomas
 2 years ago
In the European Union the following countries have banned GMOS: France, Germany, Austria, Greece, Hungary, the Netherlands, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Bulgaria, Poland, Denmark, Malta, Slovenia, Italy, and Croatia. How about POORTUGAL?

 Reply
Pawel
 2 years ago
Just wanted to say thank you for the content. I had lived in Portugal for about 3 years, and recently moved back to the UK. Honestly, I have never had worst experience with people like the one in Portugal… Just disgusting (And as EU citizen I had seen Brexit the first hand – still nothing in comparison to the twisted and hideous Portuguese mentality).

 Reply
Poor Geese
 2 years ago
Great website, but it uncovers only 0.00001% of bullshit that’s going on in this shithole called POOR-2-GEESE or POOR-2-GIRL

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Poor Geese
 2 years ago
Very true. My 7 years in Portugal have been hell on earth. The author describing his experience in court – so accurate. I had the same experience. The court room resembled a coffee bar – with all the lawyers chatting and laughing. As one person said to me – “how do you make a small fortune in Portugal – start off with a large one”!

 Reply
Cruze
 Reply to  Anonymous
 2 years ago
My ex-lawyer a woman, on a pretend right of passage case without merit and 3 laws against it, but nevertheless accepted by the Judge, walked out of the court house to have coffee with the attorneys of the opposition. I was vomiting.

 Reply
Thomas
 Reply to  Anonymous
 2 years ago
hahaha 🙂 That’s a good one, mate 🙂

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Poor Geese
 2 years ago
Absolutely true!
I have to research in such an exhaustive and time-consuming way, in order to obtain some relevant information about the insufferable rottenness of this country, however and very regrettably I always have the notion that I am only obtaining merely superficial information.
The truth is systematically and eagerly buried and destroyed in Portugal, with the full connivance of the general population.

 Reply
Cruze
 2 years ago
I am a Mozambik born portuguese who lived over 45 years away from this scum, dishonest, corrupt , crooked country! You are 💯 percent right. Since 2 years I am living all you describe. I simply hate this country!!!!!

 Reply
Thomas
 Reply to  Cruze
 2 years ago
I live in Portugal (Azores) and have learned to live here and to take advantage of what this country has to offer, without robbing it or abusing it. And I pay my dues to it as well as I am careful not to become scammed or taken advantage of, but that does happen quite often still. There still are some nice people here as well.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Cruze
 2 years ago
Hi Cruze,

You have my total sympathy, this country does truly horrible, horrible things to people’s lives. I sincerely hope that you manage to find peace and a happy place to live a prosperous and fulfilling life away from Portugal.

 Reply
Teu marido
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
Yes yanks are the rabble of the west,an enbarrassment and we treat u as such. Dont come any near
I dont treat american POWS according to geneva convention. Theyre all low brow at heart
You have no idea how much we despise u in europe

 Reply
Cruze
 Reply to  Blog Author
 2 years ago
Have no doubt, my house is for sale and my decision to leave is irreversible. Of course there are many good people in this country and being who I am, even the press would help. The challenge is, I cannot die and leave my wife and children dealing with this insane country. Please, go to ATP.com search Sergio Cruz bio or just search on google Sergio Cruz tennis and it will give you a better perspective on why I cannot accept this scoundrel behavior from the large majority of the Portuguese and their system. Sad.

 Reply
Jens
 Reply to  Blog Author
 2 years ago
I have a child in Portugal. Divorced. The child lives with the mother. I live in Scandinavia. Try to see my child. In the beginning I went to Coimbra to see him. After a flight and taxi, long journey. I came for a closed door. The mother was not home. She forgot. She was at the Algarve. I had booked three days. Did not see my son. No one help you. They say it is your own fault. When I ask why, they start to laugh. They hate people from Scandinavia, because of our good economy ? I tried to call my ex several times. She did not answer. She apped me : ‘I forgot’. She knew my address I stayed because wanted to be there some time with my son. She asked me for it. She called the landlord and told him that I was threathing her. He kicked me out after one day. Had to book a hotel for the rest in Comibra. Havn’t seen my son. Left after three days. Portugal is the worst country I have been ever.

 Reply
Kostas Petronis
 Reply to  Jens
 2 years ago
I came to Portugal as an expat, from Lithuania (Lituanie). I have an income of my own, thus I am an expat, not an immigrant, and Lithuanian salaries are the same as in Portugal, or even higher. Portuguese thought I was German or Swedish, or Americain, mostly American, because we look American or German. And they respect me very much even after they’ve found out I was from Northeastern Europe, with its cold climate, they respect me very much and they told me Lithuania is a very good and wealthy country. I know there’s some crookery, incompetence, unreliability going on in Portugal, but we have learned to live with that and we can’t complain much. My main interest in the warm Portughuese climate and the exotic vieuws. Can’t complain too much, just enjoy. We’ve found many friends in Portugal too. Perhaps we are the ones who are lucky.

 Reply
Manso
 2 years ago
I have the dubious honour of being part of the fourth generation of a portuguese family that suffered so much malicious intent (alcoholics needing drink money, lawyers needing BMW money, property managers needing cocaine money, even the BRUXA DA ARRUDA) that they simply abandoned their assets in Portugal.

Today, I am looking at a summons letter threatening the inheritors (all SIX of us) of a three-story Lisbon property with jail time if the dilapidated roof collapses on the head of the squatters of 47 years. Let that sink in: squatters of 47 years.

I am troubled by the fact that this kind of harrowing experience is not unique to my situation. I deeply wanted to blame it on my own prejudice and expectations of a 21st century european society. I guess the Portuguese passive aggression has rubbed off on me. Dammit!

Thank you for sharing your experiences. Difficult to have to relive them, no doubt. Indeed a moral tragedy.

Last edited 2 years ago by Manso
 Reply
S.R.
 Reply to  Manso
 2 years ago
Funny I stayed 3 years in VFX and man that place is depressing and full of corruption! After a very short time I only left my place to shop groceries or walk my dogs. Nothing else. The amount of trash on the hillside behind VFX dumped into the nature by construction companies is massive and I bet they charge their clients for “removing” the waste. The people Ive met there acting so nice have tried to rob me and when they couldnt do that tried to harm me in so many ways. And as I stated in my other comments I don’t take shit and am quick to get back at them. Its hilarious because apparently they are not used to that. And yeah, drug dealers peddling right out of their own (?) houses for years even in front of the police and citizens with no attempt to even hide it. Very strange. But I believe you should take matters in your own hand in your case. Take what belongs to you without permission. Its yours isnt it? So why ask for permission to live in your own house? Where I am from that’s what we do. Good luck nevertheless!

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Manso
 2 years ago
Gosh. Very stressful. I hope everything gets sorted for you. I am hoping to cut complete ties with Portugal very shortly. The last 2 years of my life have been horrendous. I have lived in many countries, but I have never experienced anything like the deceptions and corruption I see every day in Portugal. What a nightmare.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Manso
 2 years ago
So heinous!! Portuguese justice is no justice at all! It is criminal! The world has to know what is happening in Portugal.

 Reply
Maria
 Reply to  Blog Author
 7 months ago
I’m Portuguese.
I like and love my country. However, I’m ashamed to be Portuguese.
It’s all corruption schemes and money laundering. The government and private individuals are dishonest. Banks, insurance companies and commercial companies are highly swindling. They steal all over the country, from town halls and parish councils. It’s a disgrace.
There are only two social classes. The poor and the very rich.
When I get the chance, I’m going to leave this country.

— Original text in Portuguese —

Eu sou portuguesa.
Eu gosto e amo meu país. No entanto, até sinto vergonha de ser portuguesa.
É só esquemas de corrupção e lavagem de dinheiro. Os governantes, particulares são desonestos. Bancos, seguros, comerciais são altamente aldrabões. Roubam no país inteiro, nas câmaras municipais, junta de freguesia. Uma vergonha
Só há duas classes sociais. Pobres e ricos muito ricos.
Eu qdo tiver oportunidade vou sair deste país.

 Reply
Horacio Mendez
 2 years ago
I remember losing my bag in the Lisbon Intl. Airport and I complained about it to a well dressed guy who was begging for money asking him whether he might have seen my bag. There are plenty of well off beggars in the Lisbon Airport. He responded that I should be robbed at all times since I did not give him any money when he asked (I did not have spare change at that moment but I was willing to buy him coffee and a sandwich). Later on I got some change and gave the beggar €1 and he completely changed his attitude and became very caring towards me. Then the airport cops found my bag in the cafeteria (where I left it and forgot since I have memory problems), with all the drinks and some cash missing from the bag. I suspect the cops cleaned my bag before returning it to me since the bag seems to have been sitting on a chair in a public cafeteria place where no one would dare to open it. I have read somewhere that among European capitals while they tested how many out of 12 “lost” wallets will be returned, in Helsinki they returned 11 out of 12, but in Lisbon just one wallet was returned… by a Scandinavian tourist.

Hey but I am not saying that Portugal is a bad country. There are wonderful people there as well, very very nice, friendly and polite ones and they make up for the bad apples in between.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Horacio Mendez
 2 years ago
Good grief.

All of this is true. I am having the most appalling time in Portugal. I find everyone devious and dishonest. The court system is a nightmare and the judges and lawyers appear to be completely corrupt. Portugal should not be in the EU

 Reply
Horacio Mendez
 2 years ago
Why does Portugal have so many crooks and thieves? Not everyone is a crook and a thief, but quite overwhelmingly many. And why are the Portuguese so egoistic and selfish on average? Egoism in all spheres of life, from parking their cars in the middle of the road, to not helping stranded drivers on the road, to really really bad dentists, who schedule appointments and then reschedule and finally cancel their appointments just hours before the appointment begins, even to the patients in pain! Once in pain, I had dentist schedule appointment for me on the same day. After waiting for several hours the dentist’s secretary told me that she has already left the office for the night, but when I sent a friend to check out within minutes the dentist appeared to be working on her patient! Another dentist scheduled me for 2 months in advance, and yes, all 2 months I have been waiting in terrible pain! On the last day, after 2 months of excruciating waiting, the dentist called me and told me she just is unable to service me! I asked why and asked whether she can reschedule? She just dropped the phone on me. Then I went to a third dentist, who agreed to treat my teeth after 10 days of wait. After 10 days she started working on me… with her assistant, both without masks, with bad smell coming from their mouths… your females, but have unpleasant smell coming from their mouths. They did a root canal for me, for extra money. Root canal was done in 5 minutes and I knew and felt it wasn’t done properly. A month later the tooth simply exploded. After I called the dentist and asked to repair the badly done teeth or refund my money, she responded that I was stalking her and that she will report me to the police. I did not threaten her in any way.

I could tell many stories, but there were some stories of kindness as well. All in all I would say that the level of egoism is still higher in Portugal than in some other western democracies. Being polite and kind on the surface does not mean a person is going to treat you well in all situations.

There was a case when I purchased a car from a neighbour. They had a large family so I did not negotiate the price on Friday when we met. I could see that over the weekend the neighbour took the car somewhere for 2 days and returned it back on Sunday evening. I suspected that they have replaced all the better parts for old ones. Later on after purchasing it I realized that was the truth.

A year later I wanted to sell the car so I had some acquaintance bring me his car to swap cars with. I inspected his car and while I was just gently touching his car’s doors a big hole opened up in the bottom of the doors of his car. He got upset and left without swapping. That wasn’t my fault. I discovered his car was a lemon. Some weeks or months later he was working in my yard and all of a sudden once I started driving my car there were no brakes. I saw the break hoses were freshly cut and I understood who did it… then I was told that police won’t be of any help in that case and that I had to suck up the loss of several hundred euros and to keep in mind that the guy was trying to have me killed driving off the mountain without brakes.

On another occasion I’ve been drinking with a neighbour, who’s been knocking on my door at almost midnight and each time being kind and polite I would let him in and feed him food and drinks. He would open up my fridge and help himself in the fridge, kitchen and in the garden, he would walk anytime without asking my permission (typical behaviour in Portugal, or even in the entire western Europe), he would pick up the fruits and bring them back to the house and offer me as if they were his own fruits. I would say THANK YOU. OK; so one night we got drunk and he went for a smoke and I went out as well, and slipped on slippery stones and hit my head and nose onto the stones. I bled profusely and ran back into the house to wash my face and to check my broken nose out. The neighbour, instead of helping in any way or calling ambulance for me, he went and helped himself in my kitchen looking for money, coins anything of value, while I was lying in bed. What happened next you would understand why the Portuguese say they are PASSIVE AGGRESSIVE. He gathered some branches and dried leaves and made a bonfire at my front door, burning down the mat and he clearly tried to burn my house down. I have never met anyone with this sick of a mind. Ever since I told him to stay clear of my property.

There are always some kind neighbours and some weird neighbours, but I would say most people are kind enough.

 Reply
Diana
 Reply to  Horacio Mendez
 2 years ago
Portuguese people are very quick with accusing you of things ( which are redicilous and far from the truth ) and willl call the police. I ‘ve seen it once in a restaurant. A German couple complained about the people smoking next to their table. The Portuguese refused to put his cigarette away. Minutes later the GNR appeared. They had called the police and accused those Germans of threathing them. I was astonished, so were they. We paid and left the place.

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Horacio Mendez
 2 years ago
Hi Horacio,

Thank you very much for your valuable testimony.
What you describe here is so disturbing and frightening and could have ended up very badly in the case of the car brake sabotage. I am so glad you are doing well, that’s why it is very dangerous to live in Portugal at all levels. In Portugal, danger always comes to you from where you least expect it.
Portugal is a highly dysfunctional country full of bad and mad people in general, which is a shame because if it weren’t for the Portuguese, Portugal would be a very beautiful place to live.

 Reply
Anonymous
 Reply to  Blog Author
 2 years ago
But what has caused this psychopathy? I tell people Portugal is the most dangerous country in which I have lived. I am waiting until the day I can leave.

 Reply
Kostas Petronis
 Reply to  Anonymous
 2 years ago
But Portugal is considered and reported to be one of the safest countries in the world somehow and how?

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Kostas Petronis
 2 years ago
Hi Kostas,

Yes, Portugal is generally safe in terms of violent crime, but it is an extremely dangerous country in everything else. Portugal is in the hands of endless corrupt and crooks, including the farce of the judicial system that only exists to protect them, and the population is conniving and looks the other way, so Portugal works like a dictatorship. You have no rights whatsoever, they exist only on paper. If you are the victim of something serious in Portugal, fraud, health, anything… and that happens all the time, I mean all the time, nobody is going to help you, much less the authorities. Enjoy the good that Portugal has to offer, but be very careful with whom you give or invest your money, if you are stolen, 99.9% of the time you will never see your money again.
However, there is no doubt that there are very good-hearted people in Portugal, but unfortunately they are a very small minority. Unfortunately also friendliness in Portugal does not mean trustworthiness and reliability, unless you really know that person, which is very difficult to happen.

If you attentively read this same post which tells my story of how this horrible fake country destroyed six years of my life and scarred me for life, even though there are much worse cases than mine. If you read this news blog throughout, as well as the people’s testimonies, you will immediately see what I mean.

 Reply
Joao
 Reply to  Blog Author
 1 year ago
5,4 earthquake in Portugal. Maybe yanks will go away now. Good riddance

 Reply
Karma
 Reply to  Joao
 1 year ago
Or maybe Portugal will fall down and we will build something better on its ashes. XD

 Reply
Blog Author
Author
 Reply to  Anonymous
 2 years ago
Hi,

In my opinion, this psychopathy has always existed within the Portuguese society as far as I know, I think its origin comes from a mixture of defective genetics as well as a culture of total absence of moral values, generally speaking. Unfortunately, Portugal’s accession to the EU unwillingly helped to conceal this country eternal state of poverty and underdevelopment, and much more worrisome than that, of being a total desert of humanity and moral values, contributing, unfortunately, to deceiving many foreigners. When the EU is sending money to all these countless Portuguese corrupts and crooks it only makes the country more corrupt and decadent, which makes the situation increasingly worse.

Portugal is indeed a very dangerous and mad country to live in, resembling more like gambling your welfare everyday, because for something catastrophic and irreversible to happen to your life, you just have to carry your life normally, like doing some business, buying a house, going to a public hospital, or really doing any banality. In Portugal, it is not you that pursues danger, it is the danger that comes to you constantly, at any time, any place and completely unannounced. And as there are no rule of law to make things right, Portuguese courts are a total farce! 99,9% of the time that you are screwed in Portugal you are screwed forever, especially when the situation is very serious and dramatic.

I wish you all the best and stay safe.

 Reply
Red hot chillt Pepper
 Reply to  Blog Author
 4 months ago
Hello, thank you for comfirming my thoughts, i think also Portugal was always Like this and it’s a fail to move on from survival mode. These people turned themselves very Cold and they are one of the best conmen i have ever seen. It has to be in the DNA. But i also have to say when you stay Long enough you will have an adaptation phase and then you will adapt, you will lose your character because you can’t preserve it anymore, so you will adapt to the Predators around you. Now you will have the same copings, you will feel more cold, you will feel more socially intelligent, and you will Trust no one. It’s Like turning into an Animal…. a lot of people in Portugal Are sociopathic because they will adapt to the society, your brain kinda sincronizes…. save yourself, that’s all i can say.
